As a professional book translator, here is the English translation of the provided text, maintaining the original structure, tone, and any specific quirks of the Polish edition (such as the specific names or minor textual variations from the original English novel, where the Polish translator may have made a different choice).

***

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mystery of the Baskervilles: Strange Adventures of Sherlock Holmes

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mystery of the Baskervilles: Strange Adventures of Sherlock Holmes

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Translator: Eugenia Żmijewska

Release date: October 15, 2010 [eBook #34079]
                Most recently updated: January 7, 2021

Language: Polish

Credits: Produced by Ewa "czupirek" Jaros and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://dp.rastko.net (this file was
        created from images generously made available by CBN Polona
        - http://www.polona.pl)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF THE BASKERVILLES: STRANGE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***




Produced by Ewa "czupirek" Jaros and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://dp.rastko.net (this file was
created from images generously made available by CBN Polona
- http://www.polona.pl)






+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                    NOTES ON THE ELECTRONIC EDITION                    |
|                                                                       |
| The original orthography and punctuation have been retained, even in  |
| cases where they deviate from modern conventions. However, errors     |
| that appeared to be printing mistakes have been corrected. A complete|
| list of these can be found at the end of this document.               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+




                THE MYSTERY OF THE BASKERVILLES

            The Strange Adventures of Sherlock Holmes


                        BY

                    Conan Doyle


                Translated from English

                  BY EUGENIA ŻMIJEWSKA.


                  Supplement to „SŁOWO”

                      WARSAW.

                 PRINTED BY NOSKOWSKI

                 15 Warecka Street 15.

                        1902.



Approved by the Censorship
Warsaw, July 26, 1902




I.

Mr. Sherlock Holmes.


Mr. Sherlock Holmes usually rose late, unless he had been up all night, which happened not infrequently. On this particular day, however, he had risen unusually early. He was eating breakfast. I stood by the fireplace. I bent down and picked up a walking stick that our guest had left the previous evening. It was a thick stick, with a large, turned wooden knob; beneath the knob was a silver band, on which was inscribed: "To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.", and below that, the date: "1884". Such an old-fashioned, sturdy stick, affording security, was typically carried by older doctors.

"Well, Watson? What do you think of this stick? What conclusions do you draw?" he asked.

Holmes was sitting with his back to me; he could not see me, and I had been so quiet that he could not have guessed what I was occupied with.

"You must have eyes in the back of your head..." I said.

"I have a silver teapot in front of me," he replied, "but tell me, Watson, what do you make of our guest's stick? Since he did not find us at home and did not explain the purpose of his visit, this involuntary memento takes on great significance. I would also like to know what idea you form of this man?"

"I believe," I replied, adhering to my companion's method of inquiry, "that Dr. Mortimer is a physician of middle age, enjoying respect; this is evidenced by that gift from his patients."

"Good, excellent!" Holmes praised me.

"I further believe that he is a provincial doctor and that for the most part he visits the sick on foot."

"Why do you suppose so?"

"Because the stick, though originally handsome, is so worn that no city doctor would wish to use it. The thick iron ferrule is worn down, which proves the stick was in frequent use."

"Sound reasoning," affirmed Holmes.

"Furthermore, the inscription 'from his friends of the C.C.H.' indicates that the doctor rendered assistance to members of some hunting club."

"Indeed, Watson, you surpass yourself," said Holmes, lighting a cigarette. "I must admit that your conclusions are sound. I have a perceptive pupil. You have illuminated several quite dark points."

Never before had Holmes addressed me in such a complimentary manner. I rejoiced in his approval, which I had long endeavoured to earn by applying his method of inquiry to criminal matters.

After a moment of silence, he took the stick from me and examined it with his naked eye. Then he put down his cigarette, went with the stick to the window, and began to examine it through a magnifying glass.

"Interesting, very interesting..." he said, returning to his favourite place by the fireplace.

"Have you discerned any new detail that could serve as a clue?" I asked, expecting that nothing important had escaped my attention.

"It seems to me, my dear Watson, that almost all your conclusions were erroneous. In one respect only were you correct, namely, that the owner of this stick is a provincial doctor and walks a great deal."

"So I was not mistaken?"

"On that point—no."

"And on the others?"

"Your other deductions were false. For instance, you assert that the stick is a gift from some provincial hunting club. I suppose it was given to the doctor by the residents of Charing Cross Hospital (C.C.H.)."

"I admit that is more probable. What conclusion do you draw from that, sir?"

"You are familiar with my method of inquiry. Apply it in practice."

"I can only deduce that before settling in the countryside, this doctor practised in the city."

"I believe we can proceed even further down the path of conjecture. This gift was bestowed at the moment Dr. Mortimer was leaving the hospital to begin his own practice."

"Probably."

"What position could he have held at that hospital? — Either a resident physician or an intern-student. Most likely the latter, for a hospital doctor with an established reputation and extensive practice does not abandon his position to relocate to the provinces. Dr. Mortimer left the hospital five years ago, as indicated by the date on the stick. At that time, he must have completed university, and thus your conclusion that he is a man of middle age falls away." Dr. Mortimer is just under thirty years old, he is amiable, good-natured, not overly ambitious, and absent-minded. He has a dog a little larger than a dachshund, and smaller than a setter."

I laughed incredulously. Holmes settled comfortably in his armchair and blew out puffs of smoke.

"It will not be difficult to ascertain which of us two is correct," I said, approaching the bookcase and taking out an almanac listing English doctors and their biographies. Among the many Mortimers, only one could be the one we were looking for. I read aloud:

" 'Mortimer, George, District Physician in Grimpen, Dartmoor, County Devsu. Was an intern-student at Charing Cross Hospital from 1882 to 1884. Received the Jackson Prize for a study in comparative pathology, titled: "Is Disease a Deviation?" He is a member of the Swedish Pathological Society, author of many articles, such as: "Several Examples of Atavism" (published in "Lancet" in 1882), "Are We Progressing?" ("Journal of Psychology" 1883). He is the district physician for the communes of Grimpen, Thorsley, and High Barrow.' "

"You see, I was correct," said Holmes. "I further adhere to my hypotheses that Dr. Mortimer must be amiable, because only an amiable man receives such gifts from his patients; that he is not ambitious, for otherwise he would not leave London for the provinces; and that he is absent-minded, because otherwise, instead of a stick, he would have left his calling card."

"What are your conclusions regarding the dog?"

"His dog is accustomed to carrying the stick in its teeth; because the stick is heavy, it holds it in the middle; at that spot, there are traces of dog's teeth. The teeth are too large for a dachshund, too small for a setter. It might be... yes, it is a pinscher."

Holmes walked across the room and stood in the window recess. There was such profound conviction in his voice that I could not refrain from asking him:

"Whence such certainty?"

"For the very simple reason that I have the dog before my eyes; it is standing behind those doors, and its owner is at this very moment ringing the bell. I beg you, Watson, do not leave the room. He is your colleague, and your presence may be useful to me. A crucial moment is approaching. Steps are drawing near which may decide fate—for good or ill—it is unknown. I am curious what Dr. George Mortimer will request of Sherlock Holmes, the specialist in criminal offences... Pray!"

Our guest entered the room. His appearance greatly surprised me. He did not look like a provincial doctor. He was tall, thin, had a narrow nose, sharply protruding between piercing eyes, obscured by dark spectacles in a gold frame. He was dressed in a long, stained frock-coat, and his trousers were frayed. Though still young in years, he was already stooped; goodwill towards men was painted on his face. Upon entering, he immediately saw the stick in Holmes's hand and rushed towards it with a cry of joy.

"I am so glad!" he exclaimed. "I was not sure whether I had left it here or at the shipping office. If I had lost it, it would have caused me great displeasure."

"Is that not a gift?" said Holmes.

"Yes, sir."

"From the residents of Charing Cross Hospital..."

"Yes, from a couple of patients. They gave it to me as a memento of my wedding."

"What a pity," said Holmes, shaking his hand.

"What do you regret, sir?" asked Dr. Mortimer with surprise.

"It is a pity that you have dispersed my conclusions," was the reply. "So you say it is a wedding gift?"

"Yes, sir. I married, and that is why I had to leave the hospital; it was necessary to establish a home, to seek out an independent practice."

"Well, and now you are gaining renown in the field of science," I said.

"Do I not have the pleasure of speaking with Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

"No, this is my friend, Dr. Watson."

"Pleased to meet you, sir. I have heard of you often. Permit me, Mr. Holmes, to examine your skull. From the first glance, I perceived that it is extraordinary: it reveals abilities, I would even say—deductive genius. Such a skull would be the adornment of any museum. I confess, I envy you it."

"You are an enthusiast in your profession, just as I am in mine," replied the detective, "but I presume you have not come here a second time solely with the intention of examining my skull..."

"No, sir, though I am glad that the opportunity presents itself. I have come to you, Mr. Holmes, because I recognize my own impracticality, and I am faced with a very difficult problem. Since you are the second expert in criminal matters in Europe..."

"Indeed? May I inquire who is the first?"

"In the eyes of a man who prefers theory over practice, Mr. Bortillon undoubtedly holds the first place."

"Then why do you not turn to him?"

"I say that he is of first-rate authority, as a theoretician. But you, as a practical man, hold the first place in Europe—that is beyond doubt. I hope I have not offended you..."

"A little," replied Holmes, half in jest, "but as a practical man, I should finally like to know what brings you here."


II.

The Curse of the Baskerville Family.


"I have a manuscript in my pocket," said Dr. George Mortimer.

"I noticed that immediately upon your entering the room," replied Holmes.

"The manuscript is old."

"From the eighteenth century."

"How do you know?"

"Half an inch of paper is protruding from your pocket. I examined it while you were speaking, and I would be a poor expert if I could not determine the date of a manuscript from its external appearance. You have doubtless read my monograph on the subject. Now, in this case, I believe the manuscript dates from the year 1730."

"You are mistaken by twelve years. It is dated 1742."

Dr. Mortimer took it from his pocket.

"This family document was entrusted to my care by Sir Charles Baskerville, whose tragic death stirred all of Devonshire three months ago. I should add that I was his personal friend, as well as his family physician. He was a brave, sensible, practical man, and, like myself, not prone to the delusions of imagination. Yet he believed implicitly in the words of this document and was prepared for the kind of death that befell him..."

Holmes reached out for the manuscript and began to examine it closely.

"I draw your attention, Watson, to the successive use of the short and long _s_. This is one of the clues that helped me determine the date."

I looked over his shoulder at the paper, yellowed with age. On the first page was the heading: "Baskerville Hall", and beneath it the date: "1742".

"This is likely a confirmation of some legend," interjected Holmes.

"Indeed," admitted Dr. Mortimer. "The legend concerns the Baskerville family."

"I assume, however, that you desire to consult me on a more current and more tangible matter," said Holmes.

"Yes. It concerns an enigmatic fact that occurred recently; I must resolve the enigma within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is brief and has a close connection to this matter. Therefore, I shall read it to you, if you permit."

Holmes nodded. He settled comfortably in his armchair, folded his hands so that his fingertips met, closed his eyes, and listened with resignation.

Dr. Mortimer held the manuscript up to the light and read, in a resonant voice, the following:

" 'Various rumours have circulated about the Hound of the Baskervilles, but I, being a direct descendant of Hugo Baskerville, heard this story from my father's lips, who in turn heard it from his, and so I write it down with full credence. I would wish that you, my sons, also acquire a profound conviction that Justice, chastising guilt, can forgive it, and that no punishment is so severe that prayer and penitence cannot erase it. Let these tales teach you that one should not fear the fruits of the past, but rather be cautious for the future, lest the wild desires, for which our family suffered such severe punishment, should again run riot to our ruin.

'Know then, that in the time of the Great Revolution (I recommend you read the history of that epoch, penned by Lord Clarendon); in those times, Hugo ruled in Baskerville Castle, and he was, I must admit, a passionate and godless man.

'The neighbours would easily have forgiven this latter transgression, for our region never boasted of religiosity, but they could not forgive his inherent cruelty.

'Now, this Hugo conceived a love (if such a wild passion can be called by that name), he therefore loved the daughter of a tenant farmer, who leased lands near the Baskerville estate. But the girl, being modest and God-fearing, feared him as she would the devil. Now, one autumn day, on Saint Michael's Day, this Hugo, at the head of five or six companions, crept into the farm and abducted the girl, taking advantage of the moment when her father and brothers were absent.

'They brought the poor creature to the castle and confined her in a tower chamber; Hugo and his companions settled down for a night feast, as was their custom. Hearing their drunken shouts, the girl trembled, but being brave by nature, she overcame her fear and resolved to save herself. A huge birch tree sheltered and to this day shelters the window of this corner chamber. The girl clung to its branches and lowered herself down them, and having gained her freedom, she ran across meadows and fields to her father's farm, three miles distant from the castle.

'Soon after, Hugo, having left his companions with their bottles and cards, made his way to his victim, and seeing that the bird had left the cage, he returned like a madman to the banqueting hall, smashed the glass, and amidst terrible curses and imprecations swore that he would give body and soul to the devil if he helped him recover the girl. His drunken companions listened to him in terrified silence; only one, worse, or perhaps more drunken than the others, suggested setting the courtyard dogs in pursuit of the girl.

'Hearing this, Hugo rushed out of the house, summoned the stable boys, ordered them to saddle his favourite mare and unchain the dogs; to one, the wildest, he gave the girl's handkerchief, left in the corner chamber, to sniff, and galloped across the meadows on the moonlit night.

'The companions of the revel seized their horses, grabbed their pistols, and galloped after their host; there were thirteen of them in all. The moon shone brightly; they galloped along the path the girl must have taken if she fled homewards.

'They had ridden about a mile and a half when they spotted a night herdsman. They asked him if he had seen the hounds. Frightened, he replied that they had just run past, chasing a girl.

" 'But I saw something more,' he said. 'Hugo Baskerville was galloping by here on his black mare, and behind him flew a terrible, black dog, as if the devil incarnate. God forbid that I should ever again encounter such a monster on my path.'

'The drunken companions hurled a curse at the herdsman and rode on. They had ridden another half-mile. Suddenly, their hair stood on end with fright, for behold, before them galloped the black mare, covered in foam, without saddle or rider.

'The companions huddled together, for fear gripped them, but they rode on, though each of them, had he been alone, would have turned his horse and fled to the castle, but one was ashamed before another. Trudging slowly, they at last drew level with the hounds; these, though known throughout the region for their ferocity, now lay frightened in a ditch, howling terribly.

'The company halted. The riders instantly sobered. Some wished to turn back, others resolved to see what had transpired. The moon shone so brightly that one could have picked up pins.

'A mile further on, in a field, stood tall stones. Among them lay the girl, dead, and beside her Hugo Baskerville—lifeless.

'But it was not this sight, though terrible and unexpected, that made the drunken company's hair stand on end; a more terrifying image presented itself to their eyes: above Hugo's corpse stood a black, enormous dog, baring its fangs and flashing its eyes. One of the companions fell dead on the spot, struck by fear; another lost his senses; the rest of the reveling company never forgot that impression for the rest of their lives.

'Such is, my sons, the legend of the dog that has since plagued our family. I have written it down so that you may know how things truly were and not believe the circulating fables. I shall not conceal from you that after this incident, many men in our family have died a sudden, bloody, and mysterious death. Nevertheless, let us not lose faith in Divine mercy, which chastises the innocent only unto the third or fourth generation. To Divine Providence, my sons, I commend you, and I warn you not to cross this meadow after nightfall, when evil spirits are unleashed.'

(These are the warnings of Hugo Baskerville, written for his sons, Roger and John, with the command that they mention none of this to their sister, Elizabeth).

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Mortimer finished reading this extraordinary tale, pushed his spectacles up his nose, and looked at Mr. Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawned and threw his cigarette into the fire.

"Well, and what of it?" he said.

"Is this history not interesting?"

"Assuredly, for a collector of old legends and fables."

Dr. Mortimer took a newspaper from his pocket.

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English:

***

“And now, Mr. Holmes,” he said, “I will show you something more recent. Here is the ‘Devon County Chronicle’ for May 14th of the current year. It contains an account of the facts relating to the death of Sir Charles Baskerville, which occurred a few days before that date.”

My friend leaned forward and began to listen more attentively. Dr. Mortimer read:

“The recent and sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville, the Liberal candidate for the county of Devon, has filled our entire neighbourhood with astonishment and dismay. Although Sir Charles Baskerville had resided at Baskerville Hall for only a short time, his courtesy, generosity, and nobility of character had won him the respect of all who had dealings with him. In this age of parvenus, it is pleasant to see a descendant of an ancient but decayed family restoring the fortune of his ancestors and bringing lustre to an old name.

“Sir Charles, as is well known, amassed a large fortune through speculations in South Africa, and being by nature prudent, he did not tempt fortune further, as it might turn away from him, as it does with others. Having realised his fortune, he returned to England.

“He had settled at Baskerville Hall barely two years ago; his extensive plans for renovating the old mansion and introducing improvements in agriculture were well known. Death prevented their realisation.

“Being childless, he desired that the entire neighbourhood should benefit from his fortune, and not a few of his neighbours have ample reason to mourn his premature demise. We have frequently reported in these columns on his generous donations to public institutions.

“The inquest has not yet elucidated the circumstances attending Sir Charles’s death. The strangest legends circulate here, attributing his sudden demise to the action of supernatural forces.

“Sir Charles was a widower and was generally regarded as eccentric. Despite his great wealth, his habits were simple and modest. The household staff at Baskerville Hall consisted of a butler, named Barrymore, his wife, who served as cook and housekeeper combined. Both testify that Sir Charles’s health had been failing of late, and that a heart condition, manifesting in pallor, shortness of breath, and frequent fainting spells, had been developing in him. Dr. George Mortimer, a friend and the deceased’s personal physician, gave testimony to the same effect.

“Sir Charles Baskerville was accustomed to taking an evening stroll, before retiring, along the famous elm avenue in front of the mansion. The Barrymores state that on the evening of May 4th, their master informed them that he was departing for London the following day and instructed them to pack a valise.

“That evening he went out, as usual, for a walk, during which he was smoking a cigar.

“He never returned from that walk.

“At midnight, Barrymore, seeing the front door still open, became alarmed, and taking a lantern, went to look for his master. Rain had fallen during the day, so it was easy to discern Sir Charles’s footprints along the avenue. Halfway along, there is a gate leading to the meadow.

“There were indications that Sir Charles had stood by it for some time, then turned back into the avenue. His body was found at the end of it.

“Among other things, one fact arising from Barrymore’s testimony has not yet been explained: namely, that his master’s footsteps changed the moment he stood by the gate, and from then on, he walked on tiptoe.

“A certain Murphy, a Gypsy horse-dealer, was then on the meadow, at some distance from the deceased, but he himself admits that he was drunk. He states that he heard cries, but cannot specify whence they came.

“There were no marks of violence or struggle on Sir Charles’s body, and although the doctor testifies that the expression on the deceased’s face was so distorted that he, Dr. Mortimer, could not at first recognise him, experts attribute this to a cardiac aneurysm, which produces similar symptoms.

“An autopsy revealed an old-standing heart defect, and the coroner confirmed the medical findings. It is desirable that Sir Charles’s heir should take possession of the estate as soon as possible and continue the laudable work so suddenly and tragically interrupted.

“Had the prosaic verdict of the coroner and experts not put an end to the romantic stories circulating about this death, it would not have been easy to find an owner for Baskerville Hall.

“The presumptive heir is Mr. Henry Baskerville, son of Sir Charles’s younger brother. This young gentleman departed for America some years ago. Search efforts have been initiated. He will doubtless soon learn of the change in his fortunes.”

***

Dr. Mortimer folded the newspaper and tucked it into his pocket, saying:

“Those are the universally known facts.”

“I thank you for drawing my attention to a truly interesting matter,” said Mr. Holmes. “I had, it is true, read about it in the daily papers, but at that time I was engaged with the cameos that had disappeared from the Vatican Museum. I wished to render a service to the Pope and thus lost sight of what was simultaneously happening in England. This article, you say, contains universally known facts?”

“Yes.”

“Then kindly inform me now of what no one else knows.”

Sherlock Holmes leaned back against the armrest of his armchair and again put his hands together, fingertips touching.

“I shall do so,” said Dr. Mortimer, betraying increasing agitation. “I will tell you what I have not yet told anyone. I concealed it from the coroner for reasons which you will doubtless understand. As a man of science, I did not wish to publicly reveal that I believe in superstitions. Furthermore, I understood that if belief in the supernatural forces governing Baskerville Hall were to become firmly established, no one would wish to take possession of the old mansion. For these two reasons, I did not testify in court to everything I know—for it would have been of no use to the coroner—but with you, I shall be entirely frank.

“The district is sparsely populated, residences are rare, and farmhouses are scattered at considerable distances from one another.

“I frequently saw Sir Charles Baskerville, who was eager for company. Apart from Mr. Frankland of Lafterhall and the naturalist, Mr. Stapleton, there are no other intelligent people nearby. Sir Charles was reserved and taciturn. We grew close due to his illness, and moreover, we shared common scientific interests. He had brought many interesting facts from South Africa. We spent many pleasant evenings discussing comparative anatomy.

“Over the last few months, I had observed that Sir Charles’s nervous system was overtaxed. He had taken that legend so much to heart that although he took walks every evening, nothing could induce him to venture onto the moor after sunset. He was constantly haunted by the fear of spectres, and he would often ask me if I had seen any strange creature or heard any barking. These questions he always put to me in a trembling voice.

“One of my visits to him three weeks ago impressed itself upon my memory. He was standing in the hall. As I alighted from my trap, I noticed him looking over my shoulder with terror in his eyes. I turned and perceived a strange shape, resembling a large, black calf. It darted past my trap.

“Sir Charles was so agitated that I went to look for this peculiar animal. But it was nowhere to be found. My patient could not be calmed. I remained with him throughout the evening, and it was then, explaining his agitation, that he recounted the entire story to me.

“I mention this minor episode because it gains significance in light of the tragedy that followed; at the time, I attached no importance to it and wondered at Sir Charles’s agitation.

“He was to go to London on my advice. I knew he had a heart condition and that constant anxiety negatively affected his health. I believed that a few months spent in diversions would free him from these delusions and hallucinations. Our mutual friend, Mr. Stapleton, was of the same opinion. And then misfortune occurred.

“Immediately after Sir Charles’s death, the butler Barrymore dispatched the groom Perkins to me; I arrived at Baskerville Hall an hour after the catastrophe. I examined all the facts presented at the inquest. I followed the tracks left in the Elm Avenue, inspected the spot by the gate where Sir Charles had stopped, and perceived that from that point he had walked on tiptoe, and that there was no trace of other footsteps, apart from Barrymore’s later ones. Finally, I carefully examined the remains, which had remained untouched until my arrival.

“Sir Charles lay on his back with his arms outstretched, his face so altered that I could barely recognise it. There were no injuries on the body. But Barrymore made one false statement during the inquest. He said there were no tracks around the corpse. He did not observe them, but I did—quite fresh, nearby.

“Footprints?”

“Yes.”

“Male or female?”

Dr. Mortimer looked at us for a moment with strange eyes, then replied in a whisper:

“Mr. Holmes, there were footprints... of a dog... an enormous one.”

***

III. The Problem.

I confess that as I listened to this account, a thrill ran through me. And the doctor himself was visibly agitated.

“Did you see these tracks?” I asked.

“Yes, with my own eyes; as distinctly as I now see you.”

“And you said nothing?”

“Why should I?”

“Why did no one else perceive these tracks?”

“They were about two cubits from the corpse; they went unnoticed, and I myself would not have noticed them had I not been aware of the legend.”

“There are many dogs in the district.”

“Yes, but it was no ordinary dog. I have already told you, gentlemen, that it was enormous.”

“Did it not approach the corpse?”

“No.”

“Was the night clear?”

“No; cloudy and damp.”

“But it had not rained?”

“No.”

“What is the nature of the avenue?”

“It is bordered by two rows of elms and enclosed by a hedge, twelve feet high. The avenue itself is eight feet wide.”

“Is there anything between the hedge and the avenue?”

“Yes; on both sides runs a lawn, six feet wide.”

“As I understand it, there is an entrance through a gate?”

“Yes; the gate leads to the meadow.”

“Are there other entrances?”

“There are not.”

“So, to enter the Elm Avenue, one must leave the house or pass through the meadow?”

“There is a third entrance through a summer-house at the other end of the avenue.”

“Did Sir Charles reach this summer-house?”

“No; he was found about fifty cubits from it.”

“And now, please tell me, Dr. Mortimer—this will be an important detail—were the tracks you observed left on the gravel or on the grass?”

“I could not discern tracks on the grass.”

“Were the tracks on the same side as the gate?”

“Yes, the same side.”

“You intensely interest me. One more question. Was the gate locked?”

“Locked and bolted.”

“How high is it?”

“It is about four feet high.”

“So it could be easily surmounted?”

“Yes.”

“And what traces did you find by the gate?”

“None that would attract attention.”

“Did you not examine the ground around it?”

“Indeed, I did.”

“And you perceived no traces?”

“They were very faint. Apparently Sir Charles stood there for five to ten minutes.”

“How do you know that?”

“Because cigar ash had fallen twice upon the ground.”

“Excellent. We have found a kindred spirit. Have we not, Watson? But what exactly were these traces?”

“Footprints on the gravel. I could discern no other marks.”

Sherlock Holmes slapped his knee.

“Why was I not there!” he exclaimed. “This is a most interesting case, offering ample scope for scientific investigation. Why could I not have read that gravel card before other footsteps obliterated it! Dr. Mortimer, why did you not inform me sooner! If we fail to elucidate the matter, the entire responsibility will fall upon you.”

“I could not summon you, Mr. Holmes, for in that case I would have had to reveal these facts to the entire world, and I have already said that I did not wish to do so. Besides... besides...”

“Why do you not finish?”

“There are domains inaccessible even to the keenest and most experienced detectives...”

“Do you mean to say that this falls within the realm of the supernatural?”

“I do not assert that definitively.”

“But you believe so in your heart of hearts.”

“Since that tragedy, facts have come to my knowledge that are contrary to the general laws of nature.”

“For example?”

“I learn that before this catastrophe, several people saw an unusual creature on the moor, resembling the evil spirit of the Baskervilles. All say it was an enormous, transparent dog. I questioned these people—one of them is a peasant, another a blacksmith, the third a farmer. Their testimonies are identical. A superstitious fear has gripped the entire district. No one will cross the moor after nightfall.”

“And you, a man of science, believe in such fables?” exclaimed Holmes.

“Hitherto my investigations have encompassed the world of the senses; I have endeavoured to combat illness, but I know not how to fight evil spirits. Besides, you must admit that the footprints are material evidence. Hugo’s dog was also not a supernatural phenomenon, since it could bite to death, and yet it had something diabolical about it.”

“I see you have crossed over to the camp of the spiritualists. But tell me one more thing, Dr. Mortimer. If you incline towards such views, why have you come to seek my advice? You say in one breath that it is not worthwhile to investigate Sir Charles’s murder, and at the same time you ask me to take up the matter.”

“I did not ask that.”

“Then in what manner may I assist you?”

“By advising me what to do with Sir Henry Baskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station—Dr. Mortimer glanced at his watch—in an hour and a quarter,” he finished.

“Is he the heir?”

“Yes. After Sir Charles’s death, we made inquiries concerning this gentleman and learned that he owns a farm in Canada. According to our information, he is a young man of irreproachable character. I speak now not as a physician, but as the executor of Sir Charles’s will.”

“Are there no other claimants to the inheritance?”

“None. The only other possible claimant would be Roger Baskerville, the youngest of the three brothers, of whom Sir Charles was the eldest. The second brother, who died prematurely, was in fact the father of this Henry. The third, Roger, was the prodigal son, a living spiritual image of old Hugo. He had caused so much trouble in England that he could no longer remain here, fled to Central America, and died of yellow fever in 1876. Henry is the last of the Baskervilles. I am to meet him at Waterloo Station in an hour and five minutes. I received a telegram informing me that he arrived in Southampton today. And now, Mr. Holmes, what do you advise me to do?”

“Why should not Sir Henry return to the home of his fathers?”

“It seems natural, and yet, if we consider that every Baskerville who resides there faces a sudden and violent death... I am certain that had Sir Charles been able to speak with me before the catastrophe, he would have forbidden me to introduce the last of the line to that cursed residence. On the other hand, the prosperity of the entire district depends on the heir residing at Baskerville Hall. The whole work initiated by Sir Charles will come to naught if no one inhabits the mansion. I fear that the welfare of this district might sway me to act disloyally towards Sir Henry, and that is why I seek your advice.”

Holmes pondered for a long moment.

“So,” he said, “according to your conviction, some unholy force threatens the Baskervilles in those parts. You truly believe this, do you not?”

“I am prepared to suppose that such is the case.”

“In that case, this unholy force can torment a Baskerville just as well in London as in Devonshire. A fiend whose operations were localised would not be so formidable.”

“You seek to ridicule my apprehension, Mr. Holmes. But had you yourself witnessed these supernatural occurrences, you would lose all desire for jesting. From your words, I gather that this young man is as safe in London as in Devonshire. He arrives in fifty minutes. What do you advise me?”

“I advise you to take a hansom, call for the dog that is whining behind the door, and proceed to Waterloo Station to meet Sir Henry Baskerville.”

“And then?”

“And then you will tell him nothing until I have deliberated upon the matter.”

“How long will you require for deliberation?”

“Twenty-four hours. I shall ask you, Dr. Mortimer, to call upon me tomorrow morning at ten o’clock. And please bring Sir Henry Baskerville with you. That will facilitate the execution of my plan.”

“I shall do as you wish.”

The doctor noted the hour on his cuff and departed. Mr. Holmes stopped him on the stairs.

“One more question,” he said. “You state that before Sir Charles’s death, several people saw this phenomenon on the moor?”

“Yes, three people.”

“Did any of them see it afterwards?”

“I do not know.”

“Thank you. Good day.”

Holmes returned to his seat. He was visibly satisfied.

“Are you going out, Watson?” he said.

“Do you require my assistance?”

“No, my dear fellow. I shall ask for it only when action is required. This is an exceptional case. As you pass Bradley’s, kindly step into the shop and have them send me a packet of the strongest tobacco. If you can, I should be much obliged if you did not return until evening, and then we shall compare our impressions and views.”

I knew that solitude was essential to my friend when he was pondering the clues of criminal cases, drawing conclusions, and forming theories that invariably proved correct. So I spent the entire day at my club, and it was not until about nine o’clock that I returned to our rooms in Baker Street.

When I opened the door, it seemed to me that there had been a fire in the room; the lamplight appeared as if through a black mist. After a moment, I perceived that the smoke emanated not from fire, but from strong tobacco. Amidst the clouds, I discerned Holmes in his dressing-gown. He was seated in an armchair with a pipe in his mouth. Several rolls of paper lay upon the table. I cleared my throat.

“Have you caught a cold?” he asked.

“No, but one could suffocate in here.”

“Open the window. I see you have spent the entire day at your club...”

“How do you gather that, Holmes?”

“You are refreshed, fragrant, and in good spirits. You will never guess where I have been.”

“I shall not rack my brains over it. You will tell me yourself.”

“Then I have been in Devonshire.”

“In thought?”

“Yes. My body has remained here, in this armchair, and has consumed two enormous pots of coffee and an immeasurable quantity of tobacco. After your departure, I sent to Stamford for a map of that district and have roamed over it all day long. I flatter myself that every inch of the ground is now well known to me.”

“That is presumably a large-scale map?”

“Yes.”

He unrolled it and laid it on his knee.

“You see,” he said, “here is the moor, and here—Baskerville Hall.”

“All around, woods.”

“Indeed. And here is the Elm Avenue, to the left of the moor. Here is the village of Grimpen, where Dr. Mortimer has established his headquarters. Within a radius of five miles, there are few human habitations. Here is Lafter Hall. Here—the naturalist Stapleton’s cottage. Here are two farms: High Tore and Fulmire. Fourteen miles further on—Princetown State Prison. All around and in the middle—moors and bogs. Such is the terrain upon which this tragedy unfolded. We shall endeavour to reconstruct all its scenes and acts.”

“A desolate locality.”

“Yes. The Devil himself might make his abode there...”

“And so you too incline towards supernatural explanations...”

“The Devil’s agents may be men of flesh and blood. First and foremost, two questions must be resolved: first, was a crime committed? Secondly: how was it perpetrated? If Dr. Mortimer is not mistaken, if it turns out that we are dealing with supernatural forces, then judicial inquiries are useless. But we must exhaust all other hypotheses before arriving at that conclusion. Perhaps you might close the window. I find that a concentrated atmosphere aids in the focusing of thought. Have you pondered this matter during the day?”

Here is the translation of the provided Polish text into English, presented as a professional book translation:

***

—I’ve thought about her a lot. She is indeed strange.

—There are some peculiar features about it. For instance, the change in the footprints.

—Doctor Mortimer explained it by saying Sir Charles then walked on his tiptoes.

—The doctor merely repeated what some simpleton said at the inquest. Why would Sir Charles Baskerville walk on his tiptoes? No, he simply ran, *fled*, until at last he fell face down on the ground.

—What was he fleeing from?

—That is precisely what needs to be clarified! There are indications that he was already terrified before he began to run.

—How do you know?

—I assume that something he saw on the moor startled him. That sight rendered him unconscious, for otherwise he would not have run in the opposite direction, instead of racing towards the hall. If the gypsy’s testimony is credible—as he ran, he cried for help, and he was heading towards a place from where no help could possibly come. Furthermore: for whom was he waiting that night, and why was he waiting in Elm Avenue, instead of at home?

—So you believe he was waiting for someone?

—He was not young, and he was ill. He certainly could have gone for a walk, but not on such a night, dark and damp. Why did he stand for five to ten minutes by the gate, as Doctor Mortimer deduced from the cigar ash?

—But Sir Charles went out every evening, didn’t he?

—I doubt he stood by the gate for ten minutes every evening. We even know that he used to avoid the moor. On the contrary, that evening he waited by it. It was the eve of his departure for London. The matter is beginning to clear up. My dear, hand me my violin. Let’s talk about something else. Let’s put this matter aside until Doctor Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville arrive.

***

IV

Sir Henry Baskerville.

We had an early breakfast. Holmes was awaiting the announced visit. Our clients arrived punctually. It was precisely ten o’clock when Doctor Mortimer entered the drawing-room, followed by the young baronet.

The latter was of short stature, powerfully built, about thirty years old, with dark hair and eyes; thick black eyebrows gave his face a resolute, even stern, expression. From his entire bearing and weather-beaten face, it was evident that he spent a lot of time in the fresh air; he looked like a perfect gentleman.

—This is Sir Henry Baskerville, —Doctor Mortimer introduced him.

—Yes, I am here in person, and what is more curious, Mr. Holmes, is that if my friend had not suggested this visit, I would have come to you myself.

—Please sit down. Has anything unusual happened to you since your arrival in London?

—Someone has played a trick on me. This morning I received this letter.

Sir Henry placed an envelope on the table; we all leaned over it. It was an ordinary, grey envelope; the address: _Sir Henry Baskerville_, _Northumberland Hotel_—was printed in block letters, with a Charing Cross postmark and the date of the previous evening on the envelope.

—Who knew you were staying at the Northumberland Hotel? —Holmes asked, looking keenly at his client.

—No one could have known. I only decided after meeting Doctor Mortimer.

—Doctor Mortimer was already staying there, I presume?

—By no means. I was staying with a friend, —the doctor replied. —There were no indications whatsoever that we intended to stay at that particular hotel.

—Hm! Someone is evidently following your movements.

Holmes took a large sheet of paper from the envelope and spread it on the table. In the middle of the sheet was a single sentence. It read:

_As you value your life, keep away from the moor_

Only one word: “moor” was handwritten in ink.[A]

—And now, Mr. Holmes, —said Sir Henry Baskerville, —perhaps you can explain to me what these words mean and who is taking an interest in me?

—What do you think of this, Doctor Mortimer? You must admit there is nothing supernatural about it.

—No, but these words may have been written by someone who believes in a supernatural force governing this matter.

—What matter? —Sir Henry Baskerville interjected. —I see, gentlemen, that you are better informed about my affairs than I am.

—Before you leave here, Sir Henry, you will know what we know, —Sherlock Holmes declared. —In the meantime, let us examine this interesting document. The letter was pasted together and dropped into the box yesterday evening. Do you have yesterday’s _Times_, Watson?

—It’s right here.

—I’d like to see it. I want to look at the inner column with the leading article.

He scanned the column.

—The leading article deals with free trade. Allow me to read a passage from it:

“It should not be deluded that a protective tariff will shield our industry. Such a law will only decrease the circulation of capital and make life more expensive in England. If therefore you value your well-being, esteemed citizen, beware of voting for the advocates of this idea.”

—What do you think of this, Watson? —Holmes exclaimed, rubbing his hands together with satisfaction. —Do you not find the views expressed to be very profound?

Doctor Mortimer looked at Holmes with curiosity; Sir Henry was evidently astonished.

—I don’t know anything about tariffs, —he said, —but I fail to see how these words could lead us to the author of the letter.

—Indeed, Watson knows my system. Have you grasped the significance of this sentence for our case?

—I confess I see no connection between these words and the warning contained in the anonymous letter.

—And yet, my dear Watson, the connection is so close that one flows from the other. _Life_, _value_, _beware_—do you not see where these words were taken from?

—You are right, sir! —exclaimed Sir Henry.

—All doubts are dispelled by the fact that the words were cut out whole, not as individual letters, and we even see two words cut out together: _value your_...

—Indeed, Mr. Holmes, this is beyond all comprehension! —said Doctor Mortimer, looking at my friend in amazement. —Not only did you immediately recognize that the words were cut from a newspaper, but you guessed which one. Tell us, how?

—I presume, doctor, you would be able to distinguish a Negro’s skull from an Eskimo’s skull?

—Naturally. Cranium studies—that is my specialty.

—To my eyes, the difference between the bourgeois type of the _Times_ leading articles and the brevier type of the evening papers is as great as between an Eskimo’s skull and a Negro’s to you. The study of types is the ABC of a detective’s knowledge.

—As far as one can presume, these words were cut with a penknife.

—No; with scissors, and very sharp, short ones at that. After cutting, they were glued onto the paper with gum.

—But why was the word: _moor_ written by hand?

—Because it is not in the article.

—Has anything else caught your attention, Mr. Holmes? —Sir Henry inquired.

—I observe a few clues, though an effort has been made to obliterate all traces. The address is written in block letters by an unpracticed hand, but otherwise, the _Times_ is read by intelligent people. From this, I conclude that the author of the anonymous letter is an educated person who wishes to pass for an uneducated one; the very fact that he conceals his handwriting proves that you know him, or that you might recognize his hand. Furthermore: the words are not pasted in a straight line; for example, _life_ is not in its proper place. This indicates carelessness or agitation. I rather suspect the latter. The correspondent was evidently in a hurry... but why? He knew that a letter, posted in the evening, however late, would reach Sir Henry the next day before he left the hotel. Was this stranger afraid of being interrupted in his work?

—We are now entering the realm of conjecture, —Doctor Mortimer interjected.

—Say rather, into the field of probabilities. You may call it conjecture, but I am certain that the address was written in a hotel.

—How do you know that?

—If you gentlemen examine it closely, you will realize that the writer had trouble with the pen and ink. The pen spluttered twice in one word, and dried up three times while writing such a short address, which proves that there was very little ink in the inkwell. Now, in a private home, it is rare for ink to dry up and for a pen to be in such poor condition. But it is well known what hotel pens and inkwells are like. I believe that by examining the inkwells in hotels near Charing Cross, we will find the cut copy of the _Times_ and be able to trace the person who sent this letter.

He carefully examined the paper on which the words were glued, but could discern nothing peculiar.

—Has anything else happened to you since your arrival in London? —he asked Sir Henry.

—Nothing at all.

—Have you noticed anyone following you?

—No. Who would want to follow me? No one here knows me.

—Have you had any surprises?

—None. Except for the loss of one of my boots.

—You lost a boot? And how did that happen?

—You will surely find it upon your return to the hotel. It’s not worth bothering Mr. Holmes with such trifles, —Doctor Mortimer interrupted him.

—Excuse me; that is no trifle, —the detective countered. —How was it?

—I put both boots out in the corridor to be shined. The next morning there was only one. The valet did not know what had happened to the other. I bought these boots yesterday and had not worn them at all.

—If you hadn’t worn them, why did you give them to be shined?

—The boots had passed through so many hands in the shop that they needed shining.

—So yesterday, after arriving in London, you did some shopping?

—I did a lot of it. Doctor Mortimer accompanied me. For I must confess to you that, leading a free life in the fresh air, I had neglected myself a little, and it was necessary to prepare myself to play the role of the master of numerous estates. Among other things, I bought these yellow boots, I paid six shillings for them. But one was stolen before I even put them on my feet.

—That is strange. What use could one boot be? —Sherlock Holmes mused.

—And now, gentlemen, —said the baronet, —I await the fulfillment of your promise. I would like to learn what you have been keeping from me.

—Your request is reasonable, —Holmes replied. —Doctor Mortimer, I believe you are obligated to tell Sir Henry what you told us.

Thus encouraged, the doctor took papers from his pocket and laid the entire matter before the new baronet.

Sir Henry Baskerville listened attentively, interrupting from time to time with an exclamation of astonishment.

—Ha! I see that I have inherited an estate to which some revenge is attached, —he said at last, when the narrative came to an end. —Of course, I had heard about that dog since time immemorial, even from my nannies. Until now, however, I had not attached any importance to that legend. Now I see that my uncle’s death was indeed accompanied by mysterious circumstances. You gentlemen yourselves do not yet know whether this matter falls within the purview of policemen or of pastors. And in addition, I receive that enigmatic letter...

—It indicates that someone is watching the moor and the surrounding wasteland and marshes, —said Doctor Mortimer.

—And that someone is ill-disposed towards you, for otherwise, another person would have no reason to warn him of danger.

—Or perhaps, for reasons known to them, they wish to remove Sir Henry from here.

—That too is possible, and I am grateful to you, Doctor Mortimer, for giving me that thought. The question now is whether Sir Henry is, or is not, to set out for Baskerville Hall?

—Why should he not?

—It seems that danger threatens you there.

—Are you speaking of danger from men, or from the four-legged enemy of the Baskervilles?

—Our investigations will reveal that.

—Be that as it may, I am determined. There is no devil in hell, nor man on earth, who will prevent me from living in the house of my ancestors.

At these words, Sir Henry’s brows furrowed, and sparks flew from his eyes. Evidently, the daring spirit of the Baskervilles had not died out in the last scion of the family.

—Now, —he continued, —I must consider what I have learned. I would like an hour to think it over. It is half past twelve. I will return to the hotel. Perhaps you gentlemen could join me there for luncheon at two? Then I will be able to tell you what I think of all this.

—Very well. We shall be there at the appointed hour.

—Then, good-bye.

After our guests had left, Holmes sprang up and exclaimed:

—Watson, get your hat and stick. There is not a moment to lose.

He dashed from the room in his dressing gown; a minute later he reappeared in a frock coat. We hurried down the stairs. In the street, we saw Sir Henry and Doctor Mortimer a couple of hundred yards ahead of us. They were walking towards Oxford Street.

—Shall I catch up with them and stop them? —I asked.

—Heaven forbid! —he replied. —Your company is quite sufficient for me. These gentlemen do well to take a walk. It’s a fine day.

He walked at an accelerated pace until the distance between us and them was halved; then, keeping always a hundred yards behind them, he followed them along Oxford Street all the way to Regent Street. Our friends stopped once before a shop window. Holmes stopped as well. After a moment, he gave a quiet exclamation of satisfaction. I looked in the direction of his gaze and saw that a cab with a man sitting in it, which had stopped on the other side of the street, was moving on again.

—Come, Watson. We must get a look at him.

I caught sight of a black, bushy beard and eyes that drilled through the cab window at us. At that very moment, the window in the cab raised, the stranger muttered a few words to the cabman, and the cab sped off quickly towards Regent Street.

Holmes looked around for another cab, but there were none vacant. He rushed forward on foot, but the cab was moving so fast that it was impossible to overtake it. Soon it vanished from our sight.

—Dash it all! —my friend swore. —We’ve made a fine mess of it! Unforgivable!...

—Who was that? —I asked.

—I haven’t the faintest idea.

—A spy, surely.

—From what I heard from Baskerville, I assume that someone has been following him since his arrival in London, for otherwise, how would it have been known so quickly that he was staying at the Northumberland Hotel? And if he was followed on the first day of his stay, he will undoubtedly continue to be followed. You probably noticed that while Doctor Mortimer was reading, I looked out of the window twice.

—I noticed that.

—Well, I was looking to see if anyone was standing on the opposite side of the street; but there was no one. I am dealing with a cunning fox, and although I cannot yet discern whether that stranger desires Sir Henry’s ruin or wishes to protect him from danger, I feel that he must be reckoned with. After Sir Baskerville left, I rushed out at full speed to catch sight of his shadow. But this man got into a cab, thinking that this way he would not draw attention to himself.

—That leaves him at the mercy of the cabman. It’s a pity we didn’t catch the number, —Watson observed.

—My dear fellow, do you imagine that I could overlook such an important detail? I remembered the cab number... 2704. But for now, that will be of no use. I made a great blunder... Instead of following the cab from the front, I should have turned back and got into the first available one from behind. In that way, we could have followed it, or ordered ourselves driven straight to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there. Over-eagerness was a great mistake. Our opponent did not fail to take advantage of it.

We walked slowly along Regent Street. Doctor Mortimer and his companion had long since vanished from our sight.

—There’s no point in following them, —Holmes said. —That fellow has escaped and will probably not reappear. We must use the threads we hold in our hands. Did you remember the stranger’s face?

—I only remembered the beard.

—As did I; from which I conclude that it was artificial. Let us go in here.

We entered a hotel. The manager greeted Holmes with great pleasure.

—As I see, you remember, Wilson, the small favour I had the privilege of rendering you, —my friend said.

—I shall never forget it. You saved my honour and my life.

—You exaggerate, my dear fellow. You have a valet here named Cartridge, who showed much shrewdness during the investigation.

—Yes; he is still with us.

—Could you ring for him? Thank you. And I would also like to change a five-pound note.

A fourteen-year-old boy, agile, cheerful, and perceptive, appeared in the hall. He stood before the detective in a respectful posture.

—The hotel register, please. Thank you. Look, Cartridge: here are the names of twenty-three hotels near Charing Cross. Do you see?

—Yes, sir.

—You will visit each of them in turn.

—Very well, sir.

—You will begin by giving the porter a shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings for you.

—Very well, sir.

—You will say that you need yesterday’s newspapers, that you are looking for an important advertisement that was supposed to be placed in one of them, but you don’t know which one.

—I understand, sir.

—In reality, you will be looking for a copy of the _Times_ from which several words have been cut with scissors. Here is one example. On this page. Will you recognize it?

—I will.

—Each time the porter standing at the door will call the porter sitting in the hall—and to him you will give a shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings. Probably out of twenty-three times—twenty times you will hear that yesterday’s newspapers were burned; in three hotels, they will give you a whole pile; among them, you will look for that copy of the _Times_. You probably won’t find it. Here are ten shillings for unforeseen expenses. Send me a telegram before evening to Baker Street. And now, Watson, we must inquire about cabman No. 2704, then we will drop into the art gallery on Bond Street, to occupy ourselves until two o’clock.

***

V.

Three Broken Threads.

Sherlock had an unusual gift for directing his thoughts at will in any direction. For an hour and a half, he forgot about this strange case; he became engrossed in the paintings of modern Belgian masters, speaking only of art, on which he held very original views.

At the appointed hour, we stood before the Northumberland Hotel.

—Sir Henry Baskerville is waiting for you on the first floor, —said the porter.

—May I look at your guest list? —Holmes asked.

—Certainly.

The register showed that two persons had taken rooms in the hotel after Sir Henry’s arrival: a certain Theophilus Johnson with his family, from Newcastle, and a Mrs. Oldmore with her maid, from High Lodge, Alton.

—It seems to me I know this Johnson, —Holmes said to the porter. —He is a lawyer, is he not: grey-haired, with a limp.

—On the contrary: this Mr. Johnson is a coal mine owner, very active, about your age.

—You are mistaken about his profession.

—By no means. We have known him for a dozen years; he always stays with us.

—Ah! In that case, I was mistaken. Mrs. Oldmore?... That name too is familiar to me. Forgive my curiosity, but I would like to know if she is an acquaintance of mine.

—She is an elderly, infirm person. Her husband was formerly the mayor of Gloucester. She always stays with us.

—Thank you for the information. I see it is someone else. I do not know this lady...

As we went upstairs, my friend whispered:

—We now know that the person interested in Sir Henry’s fate is not staying at this hotel. Though he is following him, he fears being followed himself. This is a very significant fact. But... what is happening?

When we reached the first floor, Sir Henry, evidently agitated, rushed out to meet us. In his hand he held an old boot.

—They’re making fun of me in this hotel! —he exclaimed, —but I’ll teach them a lesson! If the boot isn’t found, they’ll remember me here!

—Are you still looking for the boot?

—Yes, but I won’t let them get away with it!

—But you said the boot was yellow?

—Yes; first they took my yellow one, and now a black one. I only had three pairs: new yellow ones, old black ones, and these patent leather ones. Yesterday, one of the yellow pair disappeared, and today, one of the black pair. Well, what about it? Have you found it? Speak.

Before us stood a frightened valet, a German.

Here is the translation of the provided Polish text into English, aiming for a professional book translation style, consistent with classic English literature:

***

"I haven't found it," he replied, his voice trembling. "I've looked everywhere, but it vanished without a trace..."

"Look here: if that boot isn't found by evening, I'll speak to the manager and check out of the hotel."

"It will turn up! I promise you it will."

"Remember that! I beg your pardon, Mr. Holmes, for this scene. Though it's a trifle, I've lost my patience."

"It's no trifle at all..."

"I see that you're taking this loss quite seriously. How do you explain it?"

"I understand nothing yet; at any rate, it's strange, like everything that has befallen you since your return to the country. But we already have a few threads to follow, and I hope that if not this one, then another will guide us to the discovery of the truth. We may waste some time pursuing a false trail, but sooner or later, we will hit upon the right one."

Breakfast was a cheerful affair. We avoided the subject until we had returned to Sir Henry's suite, when he announced his decision.

"I am going to Baskerville Hall," he declared.

"When?"

"At the end of the week."

"Ha! You may be right to do so. I should have done the same myself. I am becoming more and more convinced that you are being spied upon here, and among the millions of people thronging the capital, it is hard to detect your persecutors, or indeed, your protectors. If they have ill intentions towards you, they could carry them into execution before we can prevent it. You are unaware, no doubt, Doctor Mortimer, that you were shadowed today when you left your house?"

Doctor Mortimer started.

"Who shadowed us?"

"Unfortunately, I cannot say. Is there any man among your acquaintances and neighbors in Dartmoor with a very large, black beard?"

"No... Oh, yes... Barrymore, Sir Charles's butler, has a large, thick, black beard."

"Indeed? Where is Barrymore now?"

"He is looking after the Hall."

"We should ascertain if he is not in London."

"How?"

"Give me a telegraph form. I will write: 'Is everything ready for Sir Henry Baskerville's reception?' I will address it to 'Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall.' What is the nearest telegraph station?"

"Grimpen."

"At the bottom, I will add a note: 'The telegram is to be delivered into Mr. Barrymore's hands. If he is absent, please forward the wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel.' Before evening, we will know whether Barrymore is at his post in Devonshire."

"Splendid!" cried Sir Henry. "But tell me, Doctor Mortimer, who is this Barrymore?"

"He is the son of the former steward. For four generations, they have served the Baskerville family and guarded the Hall. As far as I know, this present Barrymore and his wife are most respectable people."

"They have a very comfortable berth, little work, and the entire Hall at their disposal, since the owners rarely reside there."

"That is true."

"Was Barrymore mentioned in Sir Charles's will?" Holmes asked.

"Both he and his wife received five hundred pounds each."

"Oh, indeed? And were they aware of it?"

"Yes. Sir Charles liked to speak of the provisions contained in his will."

"That is a very interesting detail."

"I hope you won't look suspiciously at everyone who received legacies from Sir Charles, for he bequeathed me a thousand pounds myself," said Doctor Mortimer.

"Indeed? To whom else?"

"There are a few small bequests, and a large sum for charitable purposes. The rest of the capital passed to Sir Henry."

"How much does it amount to?"

"Seven hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling."

Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise.

"I had no idea the sum was so high," he whispered.

"Sir Charles was reputed a wealthy man, but we had no conception that he was so immensely wealthy. The entire fortune, including real estate, amounts to over a million pounds."

"Indeed? Such a sum might well arouse cupidity and lead to crime. One more question, Doctor Mortimer. Supposing some misfortune were to befall our friend – pardon me for this gloomy hypothesis – who would then inherit the estate?"

"Since Roger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother, died unmarried and childless, the estate would therefore pass to distant relatives, the Desmonds. James Desmond is no longer a young man; he performs the duties of a clergyman in Westmorland."

"Thank you. These details are very important to me. Do you know James Desmond?"

"I do. He used to visit Sir Charles. He is a God-fearing man, of great worth and self-effacing character. I remember that he declined to accept any allowance from Sir Charles, though the latter implored him to."

"So this man, of such modest requirements, would inherit an enormous fortune?"

"Yes, unless the present owner disposes of the capital otherwise."

"You have made your will already, Sir Henry, have you not?"

"No, Mr. Holmes. I haven't had time. Only yesterday did I learn how things stand. But, at any rate, I believe the money should go with the landed estate. Such was my uncle's wish. The owner of Baskerville Hall could not maintain the Hall in its old splendor if he had no ready cash. The Hall, the land, and the money must be in one hand."

"You are right. I entirely share your opinion in another respect too, finding that you should depart immediately for Devonshire. But you cannot go alone."

"Doctor Mortimer is returning with me."

"Doctor Mortimer will be busy with his practice; besides, he lives a few miles from the Hall. Despite his best intentions, he could not render you assistance in case of need. No, Sir Henry, you must take with you a man you can trust, who will not leave your side."

"Would you care to accompany me, Mr. Holmes?"

"In case of necessity, I shall present myself at once, but now I have an important matter and cannot leave London. A member of a first-rate family is being harassed by a villain and exploiter. I must prevent a scandal."

"Perhaps you can recommend someone in your place?"

Holmes laid his hand on my shoulder.

"If my friend is willing to accompany you," he said, "you could trust no one so well as him."

The proposal took me completely by surprise. Before I had time to answer, Baskerville stretched out his hand to me.

"I hope you won't refuse me this," he said. "If you would do me this favour, I would be grateful to you for the rest of my life."

Unusual adventures had always appealed to me, and I was flattered by the eagerness with which Sir Henry accepted the proposal.

"I will go with pleasure," I replied.

"And you will report everything to me," said Holmes. "When the crisis comes, which is inevitable, I will tell you how to proceed. I imagine you will be ready for the journey in a few days."

"I can go on Saturday," I declared.

"Then we will meet at 10:30 at Waterloo Station," said Sir Henry.

Suddenly he uttered a cry of surprise. He ran to the bed, bent down, and from beneath the bedside table, he drew out a yellow boot.

"I've found my missing one!" he exclaimed.

"May all your anxieties be dispelled as easily," Sherlock Holmes wished him.

"This is strange, though!" Doctor Mortimer observed. "I searched the whole room carefully before breakfast..."

"And I, too," interjected Sir Baskerville.

"The boot wasn't there then."

"Perhaps the attendant slipped it in during our absence."

We sent for the valet, but he claimed he knew nothing about it and could offer no explanation for this strange occurrence.

Thus, another enigma was added to the rapid succession of minor mysteries. Apart from Sir Charles's death, in two days we had passed from one bewilderment to another, racking our brains: over the printed letter, the appearance of spies, the disappearance of the yellow, then the black boot. The finding of the yellow one was a fresh complication.

Holmes said nothing as we drove back to Baker Street; from his contracted brows, I gathered that he was weighing all these circumstances in his mind and drawing conclusions from them. He sat in a cloud of smoke for the entire afternoon, until evening.

Just before dinner, two dispatches were handed to him: The first read as follows:

"I have been informed that Barrymore is on the spot.
                                    Baskerville."

The content of the second dispatch was as follows:

"I visited the twenty-three indicated hotels, but could not find the said _Times_.
                                    Cartwright."

"So both my threads are snapped!" cried Holmes. "Nothing stimulates me as much as failure. We must seek another path."

"There remains the cabman who drove the stranger."

"I have telephoned Scotland Yard to ascertain his name. Someone is knocking. Could that be the answer?"

It was more than that. The cabman himself entered the room.

"I was informed by the police that someone living at this address was inquiring about No. 2704," said the man with a good-humored face. "I've been driving for seven years now and no one has ever made a complaint against me, so this surprised me very much, and I came to find out what you have against me."

"I have nothing against you at all, my friend," replied Holmes, "and as a matter of fact, I have half a sovereign for you if you can answer my questions clearly and precisely."

"Evidently a good day today," whispered the cabman. "How can I serve you, sir?"

"First and foremost, give me your address, just in case."

"John Clayton, 3 Turpey Street. I stand with my cab at Shipley Yard, near Waterloo Station."

Sherlock Holmes noted that down.

"And now, Clayton, tell me everything you know about the gentleman who stood outside this house at ten in the morning and then told you to follow two gentlemen through Regent Street."

The cabman looked at him with surprise.

"What should I tell you when you already know everything yourself?" he replied. "That gentleman told me he belonged to the police, that he was a detective, and told me to keep silent."

"My friend, the matter is very important, and you may find yourself in a difficult position if you keep what you know to yourself," said Holmes. "So this gentleman told you he was a detective?"

"Yes, sir."

"And when did he tell you that?"

"When getting out of the cab."

"Did he give his name?"

"Yes."

Holmes cast a triumphant glance at me.

"That was very careless," he said. "What is his name?"

"Sherlock Holmes."

Never yet had I seen my friend so astonished. He lowered his head and was silent. At last he burst out laughing.

"What a cunning rogue! He had his joke with me. I like men of spirit! Did he say his name was Sherlock Holmes?"

"Yes."

"Good. Now tell me where he got into the cab and what happened next?"

"He called me at half past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said at once that he was a detective and offered me two guineas if I would obey his orders all day and ask no questions. I agreed willingly. First we went to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there until two gentlemen came out. They got into a cab. We followed them; they got out somewhere near here."

"Did they enter this house?"

"I don't remember exactly, but my passenger saw and remembered. We stopped nearby and waited an hour and a half. Then these gentlemen passed by us; my master told me to drive slowly through Baker Street, and then through Regent Street, halfway. Then the gentleman lowered the window and shouted for me to drive straight to Waterloo Station at full gallop. I lashed the old nag and we arrived in ten minutes. As he got out, he turned to me and said: — 'Perhaps you would be curious to know whom you drove? I am Sherlock Holmes.'"

"And you haven't seen him since?"

"No."

"What did this Mr. Sherlock Holmes look like?"

The cabman scratched his head.

"He is not so easy to describe. He might have been forty years old, of medium height, about two inches shorter than you, respectably dressed, with a large, black beard, trimmed to a peak, and very pale."

"What colour were his eyes?"

"I don't know."

"You don't remember anything else?"

"No."

"Here's your half-sovereign; you'll get another half if you bring me anything more. Good night."

"Good night, sir, and thank you."

John Clayton left, overjoyed.

"The third thread is snapped!" cried Holmes. "What a cunning rascal! He knew where I lived, and for what purpose Sir Henry had come to me; he recognized me on Regent Street; he guessed that I had noted the cabman's number and would trace him, and so he supplied my name. I tell you, Watson, we have no common antagonist. I have been checkmated in London. I wish you better luck in Devonshire. I have some compunctions about sending you there. The matter is foul. We may laugh, but I tell you I should be glad to see you back here again."

## VI. Baskerville Hall.

Sir Henry Baskerville and Doctor Mortimer were ready for the journey, and on the appointed day, we set out for Devonshire. Sherlock Holmes saw me off at the station and gave me his final advice and instructions.

"I will not bias your own judgment by presenting my suspicions to you," he said. "I merely desire that you report facts to me with the greatest detail. Leave the drawing of conclusions from them to me."

"What facts do you want to know about?" I asked.

"I wish to know everything that occurs, even if it appears to have no connection to our case; I especially desire to learn young Baskerville's relations with the neighborhood, and any details concerning Sir Charles's death. It seems certain to me that Mr. James Desmond, the nearest heir, is a disinterested man and that he was not the perpetrator of the murder. We can entirely disregard him. Let us search among Sir Henry's immediate circle."

"Wouldn't it be best to get rid of the Barrymores first?"

"That would be a great imprudence. If they are innocent, they would be wronged; if they are guilty, it would facilitate their covering up their tracks. No! They must be kept, but not allowed out of sight. There is also the groom. There are two tenants near the moor. There is Doctor Mortimer, but he seems entirely honest to me; there is his wife, about whom we know nothing. Further, there is Mr. Frankland of Lafter Hall and a few more neighbors. You must observe all these neighbors carefully to ascertain their exact character, their aims, preferences, and so forth."

"I shall do my utmost."

"You have a weapon with you, do you not?"

"Yes, as a precaution, I took my revolver."

"Let it not leave you day or night; be in armed readiness."

Our friends had already found a first-class compartment and were waiting on the platform.

"We have no news," replied Doctor Mortimer in answer to Holmes's question. "Of one thing only am I certain, and that is that we have not been followed for the last two days. We always went out under the protection of a detective in plain clothes, who noticed nothing suspicious."

"I hope you gentlemen kept together?"

"Almost constantly; yesterday, exceptionally, I spent the whole afternoon with Sir Henry at the surgical museum," replied Doctor Mortimer.

"That was a great imprudence," said Holmes thoughtfully. "I beg you, Sir Henry, never go out alone, for great misfortune may befall you. Has the other boot been found?"

"It has vanished utterly."

"Goodbye," said Holmes, as the train started, "and remember, Sir Henry, one sentence from that legend: after sunset, avoid the moor and the adjacent quagmire."

***

The journey was pleasant; the time was spent in making closer acquaintance with my companions and playing with Doctor Mortimer's dog.

After a few hours, the fields grew green; grazing flocks could be seen through the carriage window. Young Baskerville observed the landscape with visible pleasure, especially when we entered his native Devonshire.

"Since I left it, I have travelled around the world," he said, "and I have seen nothing like it anywhere."

"All true Devonians share your opinion," I interjected. "No other region arouses such great affection in its inhabitants as this very one."

"That depends on the race," Doctor Mortimer explained. "One only needs to look at Sir Henry's round skull to know that he is of Celtic origin, and Celts have an innate enthusiasm and capacity for attachment to people and country. Poor Sir Charles's head was half Gallic, half Celtic. After all, Sir Henry, you left Baskerville Hall at a very young age?"

"I was barely ten years old when my father died. Besides, I do not know the Hall; we lived in a secluded cottage on the south coast. From there I went straight to America. This whole country is as foreign and new to me as it is to Doctor Watson, and I would like to see the moor and the adjacent quagmire as soon as possible."

"Your wish is granted."

Doctor Mortimer pointed through the window to a vast empty expanse.

It was a sad, bleak sight. Baskerville gazed at it with emotion, as a battlefield upon which the tragic fates of his family had unfolded.

In his drawn brows and the firm line of his mouth, an unwavering will and energy could be discerned.

The train stopped at a small station. We got out of the carriage. On the other side of the station, a wagonette awaited us, harnessed to two sturdy horses.

Our arrival was evidently the event of the day, as porters surrounded us, and the station master with his staff watched us curiously. I was struck by the sight of two stout countrymen in soldiers' uniforms; they stood, leaning on their rifles and did not take their eyes off us.

The coachman, with a stern face, greeted Sir Henry with a bow. We took our seats in the vehicle, the horses set off swiftly; we passed neat farms, surrounded by gardens, but in the distance, the grey moor still loomed.

The wagonette turned onto a side road; we sped through fertile meadows and cultivated fields. At every turn, revealing new horizons, Baskerville uttered quiet exclamations of delight. We passed an oak grove; withered leaves strewed the path for the new heir. This could be considered a bad omen...

"Holloa! What does this mean?" cried Doctor Mortimer when we entered the field.

A soldier stood as if rooted to the ground, on horseback, with a bayonet across his shoulder.

"What does this mean, Perkins?" Doctor Mortimer asked again.

The coachman turned towards us and said:

"Three days ago, a prisoner escaped from Princetown Prison; all highroads and all stations in the vicinity are guarded by the military. Our farmers do not like it."

"They should be glad. The police pay well for information about runaways. One can earn a few pounds."

"But one could also lose one's head, for such a fellow would not forgive and would cut the throat of anyone who put the police on his track."

"Who is he?"

"His name is Seldon. He was put in prison for a murder in Notting Hill."

I remembered that case well, for Holmes had been interested in it, owing to the unusual cruelty of the murderer. His death sentence had been commuted to life imprisonment: he was deemed to be of unsound mind; the judges could not believe that he had committed such a monstrous crime while in his right mind.

Our wagonette now rolled along the edge of the moor, bristling with tall stones. The sight was formidable. Even Sir Henry ceased to admire the landscape.

The fertile country lay behind us; we had before us a grey, barren land, where human dwellings, encircled by stone walls, rarely appeared. At last, we drove into a deep ravine; the green of trees spread out once more, and in the distance, two tapering towers appeared. The coachman pointed with his whip.

"That is Baskerville Hall," he announced.

The master of this residence gazed at his abode with sparkling eyes.

A few minutes later, we were entering the Hall's gate, old-fashioned and arched; after a moment, the building appeared to us, rebuilt with Sir Charles's South African gold.

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English, maintaining a professional and period-appropriate tone.

***

The rumble of the wheels died away on the withered leaves, and old trees formed a tunnel above our heads. Baskerville shivered as he saw the avenue.

“Was it here?” he asked in a low voice.

“No; the Avenue of Elms is on the other side,” Dr. Mortimer explained.

“No wonder my uncle had bad premonitions. This leafy tunnel could strike fear into the bravest man. I shall light it with electric lamps. In half a year this drive will be unrecognisable.”

We passed the dark avenue and, following a wide, raised drive, arrived before the Hall.

The central block was adorned with a magnificent portico; on either side rose medieval, battlemented towers with embrasures.

“Welcome, Sir Henry! Welcome to the home of your ancestors at Baskerville Hall!”

With these words, a tall, pale man emerged from beneath the portico and opened the door of the motorcar. Behind him stood a woman, helping him unload the cases.

“If you will permit me, I shall return home without alighting,” said Dr. Mortimer. “My wife is waiting for me.”

“What? You won’t stay for dinner?”

“I would gladly stay and show you around this residence, but Barrymore will do it better than I. I must return. Goodbye! And please remember that I am at your service at any time of day or night.”

The motorcar rolled away down the dark avenue once more. Sir Henry stepped over the threshold, and I followed him.

We found ourselves in a vast, vaulted hall, with an oak-beamed ceiling. A fire blazed in an old-fashioned fireplace. We both stretched out our chilled hands, and having warmed ourselves, our eyes wandered over the walls, hung with suits of armour, firearms, and hunting trophies.

“This is exactly how I imagined this seat,” said Sir Henry. “A typical residence of an English gentleman. When I think that my ancestors lived here for five centuries, a strange emotion overcomes me.”

Barrymore, having carried the cases to our rooms, returned and stood by the door, a veteran servant, unwilling to interrupt our conversation.

He was a middle-aged man, of striking appearance, with a pale face, a large black beard, and regular features.

“Will your Honour command dinner to be served?” he asked.

“Is it ready already?”

“It is ready. Your Honour will find hot water in your dressing room. My wife and I will endeavour to attend to your comfort until you find new staff.”

“So you wish to leave me?”

“Conditions have changed. The two of us sufficed for Sir Charles, but your Honour will doubtless wish to live in a grander style, entertain guests, and will require more servants.”

“So you wish to leave me?” Sir Henry repeated. “Yet your family has served mine for generations. It would displease me to begin a new life by severing such an old connection.”

I fancied I detected a flicker of emotion on the butler’s impassive face.

“And it will displease us too,” he replied, “but we were both very attached to Sir Charles; his death shook us to the core. This house awakens such sad memories in us that we would prefer to leave it.”

“What do you intend to do?”

“We would like to start some business. Sir Charles’s generosity has provided us with the means to do so. Perhaps your Honour would care to look over your residence.”

Above the hall was a glass-enclosed gallery. Double stairs led to it. From this gallery, two corridors led to the sleeping quarters. Mine adjoined Sir Henry’s bedroom. This part of the house had evidently been an addition: the rooms were bright, modernly furnished, and equipped with every comfort.

In a moment, we descended to the dining hall. It was a tall, old-fashioned chamber, divided into two parts: in one, accessed by three steps, the lords of the manor dined in ancient times, while in the lower part—their retainers. The vaulted ceilings lent even greater dignity to this chamber, which by the light of torches, amidst the clamour of a feast, had often been bright and merry, but now, in the glow of a single lamp, illuminating two gentlemen in evening dress, it seemed an anachronism.

All four walls were adorned with portraits of ancestors, beginning with knights from the Elizabethan era and ending with the penultimate owner of Baskerville Hall.

We spoke little, and I confess I was glad when dinner concluded and we could withdraw to the billiard room for a cigar.

“Not a very cheerful residence,” said Sir Henry. “I suppose one can get used to it, but for now I feel ill at ease. No wonder my uncle became eccentric. Let us retire early. Perhaps tomorrow, in the sunlight, these rooms will appear more cheerful to us.”

Before going to bed, I raised the window-blind and looked out. The view was of the lawn before the portico. In the centre stood two oaks, tossed by the wind. The moon, in its last quarter, shone palely through the clouds. In the distance, bare rocks were visible, and beyond them, the moor.

I lowered the blind, unwilling to gaze longer at the gloomy landscape.

I was tired, yet I could not sleep; I turned from side to side. Below, the clock chimed the quarter-hours; beyond that, there was a profound silence.

Suddenly, a woman’s weeping broke it. I sat up in bed and began to listen. For half an hour I waited in suspense, but beyond the weeping, I heard absolutely nothing else.

***

VII.

Stapleton of Merripit House.

The freshness of the following morning dispelled the sombre impression that the Baskerville residence had made on us both. In the light of the sun’s rays, gliding over the old suits of armour, the dining hall seemed more cheerful as we sat down to breakfast.

“I see it was the fault of our disposition, not the house itself,” said the baronet. “Yesterday we were tired from the journey, and chilled, so everything appeared to us in a gloomy light. Today we are fresh and rested, and so the house seems more cheerful.”

“And yet not everything was a figment of imagination,” I replied. “Did you hear weeping yesterday?”

“Indeed, it seemed to me I heard a mournful wailing. I strained my ears, but the weeping ceased; so I was certain it had been a dream.”

“I heard the weeping quite distinctly, and I could swear it was a woman weeping.”

“We must investigate this,” declared Sir Henry.

He rang for Barrymore and asked him for an explanation of the mystery. It seemed to me that the butler’s pale face grew even paler.

“There are only two women in the house,” he replied. “The dairymaid, who sleeps in the other wing, and my wife. As for my wife, I can assure you she did not weep.”

And yet, in saying this, he lied.

After breakfast, I met Mrs. Barrymore in the hall. The sun fell upon her cold, flat, and unattractive face. Her large, expressive eyes were red; she looked at me from beneath swollen lids.

So it was she who had wept during the night; her husband certainly knew about it. Yet he denied it to us. What was his purpose in this? Why did she weep?

This pale man with the black beard seemed suspicious to me. He was the first to find Sir Charles’s body; concerning the circumstances surrounding his death, we knew only what Barrymore had related. I began to surmise that it was Barrymore himself who had been hidden in the hansom cab and had tracked Sir Henry. The beard was similar. Although, according to the cabman’s description, the supposed Sherlock Holmes was shorter in stature, descriptions can be inaccurate.

This matter needed to be verified. But how? First and foremost, I needed to ascertain from the postmaster in Grimpen whether the telegram had been handed over personally to Barrymore.

In the afternoon, Sir Henry wished to attend to his correspondence; I could go to Grimpen. It was not a long walk, and the path led along the edge of the moor.

In Grimpen, there were only two stone buildings: the inn and Dr. Mortimer’s house. The postmaster also kept a grocer’s shop.

“Naturally,” he replied to my question, “the telegram was handed to Mr. Barrymore, as requested.”

“Who delivered it?”

“My boy. Listen, James, you delivered the telegram to Mr. Barrymore at Baskerville Hall last week, didn’t you?”

“Yes, father.”

“Into his own hands?” I asked.

“He was in the attic then, so I couldn’t hand it to him directly, but I gave the telegram to his wife, who said she would take it to her husband at once.”

“Did you see Mr. Barrymore?”

“No, sir; I already told you he was in the attic.”

“If you didn’t see him, how do you know he was in the attic?”

“His own wife must surely have known where he was,” interjected the postmaster. “Did he not receive the telegram? If a mistake occurred, let Barrymore himself make a complaint.”

Further questions would have been fruitless. Despite Holmes’s stratagem, we did not obtain certainty that Barrymore had not been in London at that time. He, who was the last to see Sir Charles alive, perhaps wished to be the first to see his new master.

But what motive could he have had for persecuting the Baskerville family?

I recalled the strange warning, clipped from a leading article in *The Times*. Who had sent it? He, or someone who wished to thwart his plans?

Perhaps the butler wished to secure a continued quiet and independent position in the Hall, where, during the owners’ absence, he was the true master?…

But such a goal would be an insufficient motive for crime.

Holmes himself had stated that he had never yet encountered so intricate a case. I wished to hand it over to my friend as soon as possible.

The train of my thoughts was interrupted by the sound of footsteps. Someone was running behind me and calling my name.

I turned, certain I would see Dr. Mortimer, but to my surprise, I saw a stranger.

He was a small man, clean-shaven, with dark, smoothly combed hair; he might have been in his late thirties or early forties. A specimen box hung over his shoulder, and in one hand he carried an insect net.

“Forgive my intrusion, Dr. Watson,” he said, running up to me, out of breath, “but here, on these moors, we live without ceremony. Introductions occur naturally. You have already heard of me from our mutual friend, Dr. Mortimer. I am Stapleton of Merripit House.”

“I would have known you by your net,” I replied, for I knew that Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist, “but how did you recognise me?”

“I was at Mortimer’s, and he pointed you out to me through the window. Since I am going in the same direction, I overtook you. Has Sir Henry recovered from his journey yet?”

“Completely.”

“We all feared here that the new baronet, after Sir Charles’s tragic death, would not wish to reside here. He is making a sacrifice, burying himself in such a secluded spot; but the district will benefit from it and should be grateful to him. I hope Sir Henry harbours no superstitious fears?”

“He is too rational for that.”

“Of course, you have already heard the legend of the hound that persecutes this family?”

“I have heard it.”

“It is strange how gullible the local peasants are: every one of them is ready to swear he has seen the hound with his own eyes.”

Mr. Stapleton said this with a smile, but from his eyes, it was clear that he believed these rumours.

“That legend acted upon Sir Charles’s imagination,” he continued, “and I am certain it brought about his sudden death.”

“How so?”

“Sir Charles was so nervous that the appearance of the hound could have killed him. It seems to me that he did indeed see some strange creature in the Avenue of Elms… I always feared a cardiac aneurysm, for I was very attached to him.”

“How did you know of his heart condition?”

“From my friend, Dr. Mortimer.”

“Then you believe that some hound pursued Sir Charles and that the poor man died from fright?”

“Do you know of any other cause of death?”

“I am not drawing conclusions as yet.”

“And has Mr. Sherlock Holmes expressed his view on the matter?”

This question surprised me. It could have been taken as a trap, but the speaker’s face was cool and indifferent, so my suspicions had to dissipate.

“It is no wonder I know of your connection with the famous detective,” said Mr. Stapleton. “It is widely known, after all, that you are friends. When Dr. Mortimer mentioned your name to me, I immediately surmised that Mr. Sherlock Holmes had taken this case into his own hands and that you had come here on his behalf. It is natural that I would wish to know what Mr. Sherlock Holmes thinks about it.”

“I cannot enlighten you on that matter.”

“Does he intend to visit our district?”

“He cannot leave London at present; more important matters engross his time and attention.”

“What a great pity! Perhaps he would elucidate this mystery… If you should need any pointers, I am ready to serve. Perhaps you might tell me how you intend to conduct the case, and who knows, I might be able to offer you assistance…”

“I came here to visit my friend, Sir Henry, and I require no assistance.”

“You are cautious. That is commendable!” said Stapleton, “and I have been punished for my persistence, and I shall not repeat the offer, made with a sincere heart and the best of intentions.”

We reached a path leading through the sands and marshes. To the right, an outcrop of rock jutted up; beyond it, at some distance, smoke rose from a chimney.

“This path leads to Merripit House,” said Stapleton. “Perhaps you would honour me with a visit?”

I was inclined to refuse on Sir Henry’s account, but I remembered he was occupied with correspondence; I could not assist him, and on the other hand, Holmes had instructed me to become acquainted with the neighbourhood. So I accepted Mr. Stapleton’s invitation, and we set off together along the path.

“This is a strange moor,” he said, indicating a vast plain covered with sand and grass, “to the untrained eye it seems monotonous and dreary, but to one who becomes accustomed to these sandy waves, they hold an irresistible charm, and they contain so many mysteries!…”

“Have you explored them?”

“I have lived here for only two years. The local inhabitants might call me an outsider. We settled here shortly after Sir Charles’s arrival, but my naturalistic inclinations lead me to constant wanderings, so I have come to know almost every inch of the ground. I believe no one here knows it better than I.”

“Is the area so difficult to explore?”

“Very difficult. You see, for example, that wide plain to the north, bordered by hills. Do you perceive anything unusual?”

“I see that one could gallop across that plain.”

“Many have paid for such a fancy with their lives. Do you see the green patches with which this plain is strewn?”

“Those are presumably tufts of grass.”

Stapleton laughed.

“Those are the so-called Grimpen Mire, impassable bogs. One false step, and death is certain. No later than yesterday, I saw with my own eyes a young colt sink into them. The bog swallowed it. It is dangerous to venture here even during a summer drought, but during the autumn thaws, this place is a graveyard, and yet I can pass and return safely through the very middle of the bog. Do you see?… another colt has become mired…”

Indeed, I perceived something struggling; after a moment, a long neck emerged, and a dreadful cry echoed. I started. My companion was calmer than I.

“It’s gone!” he said. “The bog has swallowed it. Two colts in two days! It is dangerous to venture onto these bogs.”

“Yet you traverse them unharmed?” I interjected.

“Yes; after long wanderings, I found a few safe paths.”

“What was your purpose in traversing these bogs?”

“Do you see those hills in the distance? They are like islands, cut off from the world. Rare shrubs grow there and unusual butterflies flutter. It is worth toiling for such specimens.”

“I shall try too.”

He looked at me with surprise.

“Heaven forbid you attempt such a thing! I would have your life on my conscience!” he exclaimed. “You would not return from that excursion. Plants serve as my guide.”

“What is that?…” I exclaimed.

From a distance, something like barking reached us. It was impossible to discern where this dreadful sound came from.

Stapleton looked at me with an enigmatic expression.

“Strange bogs, aren’t they?” he said, as if with pride.

“What is it?” I asked.

“The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles demanding its prey. I have heard that sound a few times, but never so distinctly as today.”

No living creature was visible all around.

“You are a man of education. Surely you do not believe in superstitions? How do you explain these sounds?” I asked.

“Hardened bog, cracking, sometimes emits such groans,” he replied.

“No, no; that was the sound of a living creature.”

“Have you ever heard the call of the marsh bird called the bittern?”

“No.”

“It is a lost species, but perhaps it has survived here. Everything is possible in such bogs. I would not be surprised if that sound was the call of the last bittern in Europe.”

“Be that as it may, I have never in my life heard such a sound.”

“Yes, this wilderness contains many strange things. Look at that hill. What do you perceive?”

The entire slope was strewn with round, regularly shaped stones.

“What are these?” I asked.

“These are the dwellings of our venerable ancestors. Prehistoric man densely populated these moors, and since no one has lived here since those times, their caves have remained untouched. One sees there beds, stools, bowls…”

“From what era?”

“Neolithic, presumably.”

“What did these people do?”

“They herded flocks on the hillsides, drained the bogs, fashioned weapons and tools from stone. Yes, this moor is an interesting page of history. But forgive me…”

Stapleton broke off suddenly and hurried after a rare specimen of butterfly. He pursued it frantically, leaping and spinning in circles.

Amused by this naturalistic *intermezzo*, I decided to wait for the result of the chase. Just then, the sound of footsteps reached me again. I looked around and saw a woman approaching me.

She was coming from the direction of Merripit House. I immediately surmised it was Miss Stapleton, for I had heard of her uncommon beauty. Indeed, even in the capital such beauty would draw attention, but she was truly dazzling in this wilderness. I was all the more astonished that Miss Stapleton formed a complete contrast to her brother. As he was pale and thin, so she was of splendid build; as he was inconspicuous, so she was refined. He had grey hair and eyes, and a pale complexion—she was such a striking brunette that one rarely sees her like in England. She had extraordinarily regular features, fiery eyes, beautifully curved lips, and a complexion with a warm flush. She seemed like a wondrous, supernatural apparition against the backdrop of the dreary landscape. Her eyes anxiously followed her brother; she quickened her pace and drew level with me. I raised my hat and was about to introduce myself, but she did not let me speak.

“Leave here at once!” she whispered. “Return immediately to London…”

I looked at her in astonishment. Her eyes blazed, and her foot tapped the ground.

“Why should I return?” I asked.

“I cannot explain it to you,” she replied in a hushed voice, “but for God’s sake, heed my advice. Leave here and never return.”

“But I have but just arrived…”

“Why will you not understand that this warning is for your own good? Once more I repeat: return to London at once, this very evening. Leave these parts. Quiet!… My brother is coming. Do not tell him a word about this…” “Please pick me a few orchids from this tuft of grass,” she said in a completely different voice. “We have many wild orchids. I like this flower.”

Stapleton abandoned the chase and returned, out of breath.

“How did you come to be here, Beryl?” he said sharply.

“I see you are tired,” she asked.

“Yes, I was chasing a butterfly. A beautiful specimen; one rarely finds it, especially in autumn.”

He spoke lightly, but he looked at his sister probing and menacingly.

“You have met, I see,” he said. “Introductions are now superfluous.”

“Yes; I was just asking Sir Henry to pick me a few orchids.”

“So you took the gentleman…”

“I took you for Sir Henry Baskerville,” she interjected.

Here is the translation of the provided Polish text into English, maintaining a style appropriate for a classic book of the genre, such as "The Hound of the Baskervilles":

--

"You are mistaken," I said. "I am only his friend. My name is Watson."

A blush suffused her lovely face. She was visibly embarrassed.

"There has been a misunderstanding..." she said.

"You haven't had much time for conversation, I gather," her brother interjected, piercing her with a searching gaze.

"I was speaking to Dr. Watson as a permanent resident of these parts, not as a visitor. But perhaps you would care to visit us at Merripit House?"

I accepted the invitation. The way was but a short distance, leading along the edge of the meadow. The house, evidently converted from an old farm, rose amidst scanty trees, surrounded by a stone wall; it looked sad and cheerless.

An old, taciturn servant opened the door for us. The dwelling was spacious, and its furnishing bore a woman's touch. Looking through the window at the bogs, strewn with stones, I wondered what could have prompted so cultivated a man and so beautiful a woman to choose this as their abode.

"You are doubtless surprised that we have taken up residence here?" said Stapleton, as if in answer to my thoughts. "And yet we are well and feel happy. Are we not, Beryl?"

"Quite happy," she confirmed, without enthusiasm.

"I had a school in one of the northern counties," Stapleton began, "but that kind of work did not suit my temperament, though the interaction with children, the shaping of their minds, held much charm for me. Fate, however, pushed me onto a different path. An epidemic broke out. Three boys from my school fell victim to it; as a result, its reputation suffered, and it could no longer be maintained. This caused me a considerable financial loss; but I regret only the dead children; for myself, I do not lament it, for I now have time to devote myself to my favourite research, and I have found here a rich field for botanical and zoological studies. My sister shares my naturalistic tastes. I tell you this to help you solve the riddle you were pondering as you looked out at the moor."

"Indeed, I was surprised that you chose this area, where living must be so sombre, especially for you, madam."

"I am quite content here," she declared.

"We have books, we have our scientific pursuits, and besides, we have neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a learned man in his field, and poor Sir Charles was a pleasant companion. We saw him often, and his death was a blow to us. What do you think, would it be intrusive if I were to pay a visit to Sir Henry today?"

"I am sure he will be pleased to see you."

"Then I will visit him this afternoon. I should like, if possible, to make his stay in these parts more pleasant, before he grows accustomed to the gloomy surroundings. Perhaps you would care to see my collection of butterflies? I believe there is no richer one in all of Southern England."

I could not accept the invitation; I was already eager to return to my companion. I was anxious for him, involuntarily under the depressing influence of the landscape, and doubtless also of Miss Stapleton's warnings, spoken so seriously, almost solemnly, that they must have concealed some secret. Therefore, despite pressing invitations to breakfast, I bade farewell to the siblings and returned to the Hall by the same path.

There must have been another, shorter way, however, because before I reached the high road, to my great astonishment, I saw Miss Stapleton sitting on a stone by the roadside.

"I ran ahead to meet you here, I didn't even take my hat," she said, breathless. "I want to ask you to forget my words. They did not concern you."

"I cannot forget them, Miss Stapleton," I replied. "I am Sir Henry's friend, and I am concerned for his safety. Please explain to me why you advise him to leave these parts and return to London?"

"It was a woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me, you will find that I cannot always explain the motives of my words and actions."

"No, no, I remember how your voice trembled, I remember how you looked at me with fear. For God's sake, be frank with me, Miss Stapleton. From the first moment I set foot in these parts, I have felt something ominous in the air. We are treading as if on those green clumps on the bog; any moment we could drown in them, and no one will show us where the danger lies. Tell me what your words meant, and in return, I promise that I shall repeat them to Sir Henry."

Hesitation crossed Miss Stapleton's face, but it was brief.

"You attach too much importance to my words," she replied. "My brother and I were deeply distressed by Sir Charles's death. He visited us often, speaking with profound emotion about the curse resting on his family. No wonder that after his tragic death I was ready to believe in the validity of his fears, and seeing his heir, a representative of that same family, I considered it my duty to warn him of possible danger. That was the sole purpose of my words."

"But what does that danger consist of?"

"Have you heard the legend of the hound?"

"I don't believe in such nonsense."

"But I do. If you have influence over Sir Henry, take him away from this area. The world is wide. Why must Sir Henry necessarily live here, where danger threatens him?"

"Precisely because it threatens him. Such is his character. If you cannot provide me with a more important reason, then with this argument I shall not be able to persuade him to leave Baskerville Hall."

"I cannot provide another reason, for I know none other."

"One more question, Miss Stapleton. If there was no hidden meaning in your words, then why did you not want your brother to hear them?"

"My brother desires that the Hall be inhabited, for he believes that the presence of the owner is necessary for the good of the neighbourhood. He would be angry with me if he knew I advised Sir Henry to leave these parts. I have fulfilled my duty and will add nothing more. I must return, for my brother will guess that I have spoken with you. Goodbye!"

She departed, leaving me a prey to fears and anxieties regarding Sir Henry.

---

**VIII. DR. WATSON'S FIRST REPORT.**

From this point onwards, I shall transcribe my own letters to Sherlock Holmes, for they reproduce these events, thoughts, and suspicions with greater accuracy than my memory.

*Baskerville Hall, October 13th.*

My Dear Holmes,

My previous letters and telegrams have informed you precisely and in detail of everything that has transpired in this gloomy corner.

The longer I stay here, the more sad and uneasy I feel. These bogs cast a shadow upon the soul. It seems to me that I have been transported not only to another country but also to another era, that I am living in prehistoric times.

The stone dwellings of our ancestors thickly dot the moor, and one must wonder why they settled in these bogs. I suppose it was a cowardly tribe, shunning warlike neighbours, and the fen was the most secure stronghold against them.

These hypotheses, however, have nothing to do with my mission and will not interest your practical mind. I know how indifferent you are as to whether the earth revolves around the sun, or vice versa. I return to the facts concerning Sir Henry Baskerville.

If you have not received reports for the last few days, it is only because there has been nothing to write about until today. Today, an unusual circumstance occurred, but before I tell you about it, I must acquaint you with other aspects of the situation.

I have already mentioned the escaped convict who is hiding among the bogs. In all likelihood, he has already left these parts, which is desirable for the inhabitants living in this wilderness.

Two weeks have passed since his escape, and so far no one has seen him or heard of him. It is certainly easy to hide in this fen, strewn with boulders that served as shelter for prehistoric man, but there is no food there; we therefore believe that he has fled, and the local farmers are beginning to take heart.

There are four strong men of us in the Hall; we could defend ourselves if necessary; but I admit, I was afraid for the Stapletons. They live in a complete wilderness, a couple of miles from human habitations, keeping only a servant and a cook. The brother is frail and not very strong, the sister, though tall and well-built, could not offer resistance to such a ruffian. If he attacked them, they would be at his mercy. Sir Henry is worried about them; he offered them, as a precaution, Perkins the groom, but Stapleton flatly refused.

Our baronet is beginning to take a lively interest in the beautiful neighbour. No wonder that in such a monotonous life he seeks diversion, and it is even less surprising since the young lady is exquisite. There is something ardent, subtropical about her; the contrast between her and her cold, unpleasant brother – astounding. Although he too gives the impression of a volcano buried under ashes. He evidently has great influence over his sister; I noticed that Miss Beryl, when speaking, constantly looks at him as if seeking approval. He has menacing flashes in his eyes, and his tight lips betray a hard and unrelenting nature. He would be an interesting study for you.

He paid a visit to Baskerville the day after our arrival, and the very next morning he led us to the place famed for the legend of the cruel Hugo. It is a long, multi-mile excursion across the meadow and fens, and the place itself is so gloomy that it could inspire the idea for a bloody legend. Two enormous, pointed boulders jut out from it; Sir Henry was moved and repeatedly asked Stapleton if he truly believed in the influence of supernatural forces on the course of our lives. He asked cheerfully, but it was clear that he took the matter seriously. Stapleton was cautious in his replies, but one could see that he refrained from expressing his thoughts out of consideration for the baronet's peace of mind. He recounted several instances in which ancient families had been persecuted by some unclean force and left us with the impression that he held belief in that legend.

Returning from this excursion, he invited us to breakfast at Merripit House, and it was then that Sir Henry met Miss Stapleton. From the first moment, she made a great impression on him, and if I am not mistaken, it was mutual. From that day on, the baronet has been there every day. Today, he invited the siblings to dinner. One might think such a marriage should be welcome to Stapleton, yet I observe dissatisfaction on his face whenever Sir Henry approaches his sister or shows his admiration. I explain this to myself as a selfish attachment, because the life of a naturalist in this wilderness would be even sadder if it were not illuminated by Miss Beryl. I doubt Stapleton would carry his selfishness so far as to oppose this excellent marriage, though he clearly does not desire intimacy between his sister and the baronet; he interfered with their private conversations a couple of times.

At any rate, it will be difficult for me now to fulfill your instruction: that I should never leave Sir Henry. I would quickly become a nuisance to him if I followed him like a shadow.

The day before yesterday, on Thursday, Dr. Mortimer was with us for breakfast. In his excavations at Long-Dawn, he managed to find a prehistoric human skull. He is overjoyed. It would be difficult to find a greater enthusiast or fanatic.

After breakfast, the Stapletons arrived. At Sir Henry's request, the doctor led us all to the Yew Alley to show us how things stood that night. The alley is long, with wide hedges on both sides, and lawns beyond them. At the end of the alley stands a summer house, a kind of arbour. Halfway along there is a gate leading to the meadow, beyond which lies the moor. The gate is wooden, white, with a latch and a bolt. I remembered your hypothesis and tried to reconstruct the catastrophe in my mind.

Standing by that gate, poor Sir Charles saw something that frightened him so much that he lost consciousness and began to run straight ahead, until his breath gave out and he fell dead from exhaustion and terror. He fled through a leafy tunnel. What frightened him? An ordinary shepherd's dog, or some fantastic, spectral creature? Was there a human hand in it, or a supernatural power? Perhaps the pale Barrymore knows far more about this incident than he tells? Whatever the solution to the riddle, its final word is – crime.

I have met yet another neighbour, Mr. Frankland of Lafter Hall. He lives four miles from us. He is not a young man, grey-haired, of a choleric temperament, a notorious litigator; he has lost half his fortune on lawsuits. He cares not for the object of dispute, but for the process itself. Sometimes he closes a public road and forces the parish to sue him. Other times he encroaches on a private road, proving that it was formerly for public use. He knows all customary laws, sometimes using his knowledge to the benefit of the peasants of Fernworthy, and sometimes against them; he is sometimes carried in triumph through the village, or burned *in effigie*, depending on his activities. He currently has seven lawsuits, which will likely consume the rest of his fortune. Beyond this mania, he seems a good-natured, honest old man; I mention him only because you instructed me to describe to you all the people I meet and hear about.

Currently, Mr. Frankland has a new diversion: through an excellent telescope, for entire days from the roof of his house, he watches for the escaped convict. If only he would stop there! But he reportedly wants to sue Dr. Mortimer for opening a prehistoric grave without the permission of the descendants, and this as a result of... a skull from the Neolithic era, unearthed at Long-Dawn. At any rate, he livens up the monotony of our lives and introduces a bit of a comical element into it.

And now, having reported to you about the escaped convict, and described the Stapleton siblings, Dr. Mortimer, and Mr. Frankland of Lafter Hall, I will tell you something very interesting about Barrymore and the unusual events of last night.

First, a word about the telegram you sent from London, which was to serve as proof of Barrymore's presence at the Hall. I already reported to you that, judging from the postmaster's words, I came to the conviction that this attempt proved nothing. I spoke of this to Sir Henry, and he, with his usual frankness, summoned Barrymore and asked him if he had received the telegram. Barrymore replied in the affirmative.

"Did the boy deliver it into your hands?" asked Sir Henry.

Barrymore looked surprised.

"No," he replied after a moment's thought, "I was in the attic then, but my wife brought me the dispatch at once."

"Did you reply to it yourself?"

"I asked my wife to do it for me."

After dinner, he brought up the matter again of his own accord.

"I didn't understand why your lordship asked me about that telegram," he said. "Did I do anything wrong?"

Sir Henry reassured him on that point and offered him some of his wardrobe, as the suits ordered in London had already arrived.

Mrs. Barrymore interests me. She is a stout, ponderous, serious woman, looking like a Puritan. It is difficult to imagine a less emotional person, yet I have already told you that I distinctly heard her weeping on the first night of our stay at Baskerville Hall; later I often saw traces of tears on her face. She must have some great sorrow. Sometimes I wonder if she is troubled by pangs of conscience, and at times I suspect Barrymore of being a tyrant.

I noticed something unusual about him at once; but what I saw last night confirms my worst suspicions.

And yet the fact itself may seem trivial.

You know that I am a light sleeper, and from the moment I arrived here as a guardian angel, I sleep with open eyes, like a hare.

Now, last night, around two o'clock, I was woken by the sound of footsteps passing by my room. I got up, opened the door a crack, and looked out. A long shadow glided down the corridor, cast by a man creeping on tiptoe with a candle in his hand. He was in his shirt and trousers, walking barefoot, slowly and very cautiously; there was something mysterious in his whole demeanour.

The corridor is interrupted by a balcony located above the main hall and portico, but it continues on its other side. When I stood by the balcony, that shadow had already reached the other end of the corridor; by the gleam of light, I discerned that he had entered one of the adjacent rooms.

As all these rooms are unfurnished, the purpose of his journey became even more puzzling. The light shone steadily at one point. I peered into this room through the half-open door.

Barrymore stood by the window, holding the candle close to the pane. He was turned to me in profile; I saw expectation and anxiety on his face. For a moment he stood motionless, finally he muttered something, waved his hand, and set the candle down.

I retreated to my room. Soon, the soft footsteps reached me again. Barrymore was returning.

For a long time, I could not compose myself; a thousand thoughts and suspicions flitted through my mind. Already half-asleep, I heard the scrape of a key in a lock, but I could not make out in which one.

What all this means, I do not know, but in any case, strange things are happening in this house, boding nothing good. Sooner or later, we shall unravel the mystery. I do not wish to confuse you with my suppositions, for you demand only facts.

This morning I had a long conversation with Sir Henry, and we devised a plan of campaign. You will find it in my next letter.

---

**IX. (DR. WATSON'S SECOND REPORT). LIGHT ON THE MOOR.**

*Baskerville Hall, October 15th.*

My Dear Holmes,

I have indeed left you long without news, but today I wish to compensate you.

Facts followed one another so rapidly that it was difficult to record them. I reported to you that I had seen Barrymore, creeping by night with a light in his hand to an empty room. Now I have a whole budget of news. Things have taken an unexpected turn; in the last two days, more than one mystery has been clarified, while others have grown even darker. Judge for yourself.

The next day, before breakfast, I went to the empty room Barrymore had visited the previous night. The window he had approached faced west and distinguished itself from others by offering the nearest view of the moor. There is a clear space there between two trees, through which the meadow and moor can be seen close at hand, whereas from other windows the view of them is more distant and obscured.

Could Barrymore have been watching for someone or something on the moor? The night was so dark that even with the best eyesight, it would have been impossible to discern anything. So what was the purpose of these observations?

At first, I thought it was a love intrigue. That's why he crept barefoot, that's why he was uneasy. Barrymore is an unusually handsome man and might have success with women – this hypothesis seemed probable to me. The scrape of a key in the lock perhaps indicated a secret departure for a rendezvous.

Such were the conclusions I drew; I tell you them, although the outcome proved their baselessness.

Judging that I had no right to keep them to myself, I confided them to Sir Henry, after first telling him what I had seen. He was less surprised than I might have expected.

"I know Barrymore walks at night," he declared. "Several times I have heard his footsteps in the corridor at one and the same hour."

"So perhaps he goes to the window every night?"

"Perhaps. In that case, we shall catch him in the act and discover the purpose of his wanderings. I am curious, too, how Holmes would act in our place?"

"I daresay he would do the same as you intend," I replied. "I only fear Barrymore might hear our footsteps."

"He is dull of hearing; I have noticed it many times already. So, tonight we shall lie in wait in my room."

Sir Henry was clearly pleased; this new expedition was a diversion from the monotonous life.

A feverish activity reigned at the Hall. The baronet had brought an architect from London, and from Plymouth – carpenters and decorators; he spared no expense to restore the former glory to his ancestors' abode.

Once the Hall is furnished, the only thing lacking will be – a beautiful lady of the house.

Between you and me, I can easily guess who might occupy that place. The baronet is head over heels in love with our beautiful neighbour, Miss Stapleton.

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English:

But obstacles stood in the path of this love. Only today, Sir Henry had an unpleasant surprise.

After our conversation about Barrymore, he took his hat and went out. I followed him.

"Are you accompanying me, Watson?..." he asked with evident displeasure.

"That depends on where you are going; if it's to the meadow and the moor, I will go with you."

"That is precisely where I am headed."

"You know, of course, what Holmes instructed me... I regret forcing my company on you, but I cannot let you go alone onto the moors."

Sir Henry laid his hand on my shoulder.

"My dear fellow," he said with a smile, "Sherlock Holmes, for all his sagacity, did not foresee what has transpired since I took up residence on the moor. You understand me, do you not?... And I am certain you will not wish to hinder me at such a moment."

I was in a difficult position, and as I stood there, perplexed, my companion turned and walked across the meadow.

I reproached myself for leaving him to his own devices. What if some misfortune should befall him!...

At the mere thought of it, the blood rushed to my head.

Perhaps it is not too late; perhaps I can still overtake him...

I followed in the direction Sir Henry had gone, but I could not discern him until at last he appeared at a bend in the road, where the path leading across the moor diverged from the main track.

I turned aside, and instead of following him, I ascended a small knoll, from where the entire plain was visible. Concealing myself behind a rock, I observed his movements.

He had gone a good half-mile along the path when I suddenly saw Miss Stapleton approaching him.

So, this was a prearranged meeting...

Having greeted each other, they walked on, very slowly; from the movement of their hands, I gathered that Miss Beryl was asking him for something.

I deliberated what to do. It is repugnant to spy on a friend; yet under the circumstances, it was my duty; but if he were in danger, I was too far away to render assistance. So what was to be done? I wavered between a sense of delicacy and duty.

Meanwhile, Sir Henry and his companion stopped on the path. They were talking very animatedly. Suddenly, I noticed that I was not the only witness to their meeting. I saw something green, suspended in the air. Upon closer inspection, I saw that it was a butterfly net.

Stapleton was approaching. He was much closer to the young couple than I, and evidently making his way towards them.

At that moment, Sir Henry put his arm around Miss Stapleton's waist; it seemed to me that she resisted his embrace. He bent over her, intending to kiss her — she shielded herself with her hand.

Suddenly they sprang back from each other. Stapleton had startled them. He rushed forward, gesticulating wildly, and when he reached them, he stamped his feet and no doubt shouted and reproached Sir Henry. Sir Henry evidently sought to justify himself.

At last, Stapleton beckoned to his sister, who, after a moment's hesitation, followed him, casting a glance at the baronet.

He stood for a long time, as if rooted to the spot, finally walking away with slow steps, his head bowed.

What did it all mean? I could not comprehend it, but I was agitated by the sight of this scene. I descended from the hill and met Sir Henry.

"Watson!" he exclaimed. "Where did you spring from? Have you been following me against my will?"

I confessed the truth to him. At first, his eyes blazed with anger, but my frankness evidently disarmed him; in the end — he laughed.

"One might imagine such a desolate place favoured solitude, and yet," he said jestingly, "it seems impossible to conduct a courtship without witnesses... A sad courtship, moreover. Where were you hiding?"

"Behind those rocks, on the hill."

"Did you see from which direction her brother came?"

"From the opposite side."

"Does he strike you as a madman?"

"No."

"From the first moment, he seemed abnormal to me, and now I am ready to assume that either he or I are missing a screw. Listen, Watson: you have lived with me for a couple of weeks now, tell me honestly, have you not observed any mental aberration in me? What do you think: could I be a good husband to a woman I loved?"

"It seems to me, the best possible."

"Surely he can find no fault with my social standing. So what has he against my person? I have wronged no one; I have lived honourably. And yet he will not permit me to touch even the tip of her fingers."

"Did he explicitly forbid it?"

"Yes, and he said many other unpleasant things to me. I tell you, Watson, though I have known her for only a couple of weeks, I feel that with no woman would I be as happy as with her; and it seems to me that she returns my feelings. In a woman's eyes, there are glances more eloquent than words. But this insufferable brother will not allow us to communicate. Today, for the first time, I had an opportunity to see her alone. She was clearly pleased, though she would not listen to my declarations of love. She continually returned to one subject, warning me of imminent danger and asserting that she would have no peace until I left these parts. I told her that I was in no hurry to leave, so long as she remained here, and that if she truly cared for my safety, she would leave this vicinity with me, and I asked for her hand. But before she could answer me, this vexatious brother of hers burst in between us like a cannonball. He was pale with rage, he trembled, and lightning flashed from his light eyes.

'How dared I address his sister in such a manner?' he cried. 'Is it because I am a baronet that I am permitted everything?'...

I explained to him that I had no need to be ashamed of my feelings for Miss Beryl and that I hoped she would honour me with her hand.

This did not improve matters. Stapleton became thoroughly enraged. And I, too, lost my patience. I answered him too sharply, considering her presence.

It ended with him departing with his sister, and I returning, utterly humbled. Explain to me what this means, and I shall be grateful to you until my dying day."

I offered several explanations, but they did not satisfy Sir Henry, for truly, what could one object to in him?

His title, fortune, character, age, and good looks all speak in his favour. The only possible objection one could raise against him is that fate seems to pursue his family. But Stapleton, as a man of learning, ought not to attach importance to superstitions.

Therefore, I cannot comprehend why he rejects his suit, without even inquiring whether his sister is favourably disposed towards him; and I am further surprised that she obeys him blindly.

Our conjectures on this matter were interrupted by Stapleton himself, who arrived in the afternoon to apologise to the baronet for his impulsiveness.

After a long private conversation with Sir Henry in his study, they emerged reconciled. To seal the accord, he invited us to dinner at Merripit House.

"He is a strange man," Sir Henry said to me after Stapleton's departure. "I cannot forget the look with which he scathed me this morning, but for all that, I must admit that he has now conducted himself honourably."

"Did he explain his behaviour?"

"He said that his sister is everything to him in the world. They have always lived together; she has been his only companion. The mere thought of losing her drives him to despair. He had not noticed my inclination towards Beryl, and when he saw her in my arms, such a selfish rage overcame him that he lost his senses and was not accountable for his words and actions. He apologised, however, and admitted that it would be madness to wish to keep to himself a woman as beautiful as his sister. If she is to leave him, then he, Stapleton, would prefer her to marry a neighbour living so close by, rather than anyone else. But he must accustom himself to the idea. He is prepared to promise me her hand, provided that in return I give my word of honour that for three months I shall not speak to her of love, nor endeavour to see her alone, and shall content myself with a mere social acquaintance. I promised him solemnly, and matters stand thus."

So, one of the mysteries is now explained. We have found solid ground beneath our feet in the bog through which we have been blindly groping.

We now know why Stapleton looked unfavourably upon his sister's suitor; although this suitor is one of the best matches in the country.

And now I turn to another thread which I have drawn from the tangled skein — to the cause of Mrs. Barrymore's tears and her husband's mysterious nocturnal wanderings.

Congratulate me, Holmes, and admit that I have not betrayed your trust. This enigma was solved in a single night.

I wrote "in a single night," yet in truth it transpired over two nights, for our first attempts failed.

Sir Henry and I sat in his room until three in the morning, but no other sound reached us, save for the ticking of the clock. Finally, we both dozed off in our chairs.

Undeterred by this, we resolved to renew our attempt. The following night, we extinguished the lamp, and lighting cigarettes, we waited to see what would transpire.

The hours dragged slowly. One o'clock struck, then two; we were already being overcome by sleep, when suddenly we both straightened in our chairs. The sound of footsteps reached us.

They crept along softly and finally faded into the distance. Then the baronet opened the door, and we tiptoed out.

Barrymore had already passed the gallery; the corridor was plunged in darkness.

We tiptoed to the other wing just as the butler slipped into a room at the end of the corridor. He closed the door behind him. We advanced silently, treading cautiously, fearing that a creak of the floorboards might betray us. We peered through the keyhole. Barrymore stood by the window with a candle in his hand.

We had not formulated a plan of campaign, but the baronet considered the direct route to be the shortest and most proper. Without hesitation, he entered the room. Barrymore sprang back from the window.

"What are you doing here?" Sir Henry asked him.

"Nothing, Sir."

He was so startled that the candle trembled in his hand.

"I came to see if the window was closed... I close all the windows every day to prevent thieves from getting in."

"Yes, especially here, on... the second floor. Listen, Barrymore," he said, "we have both decided to force you to tell the truth. The sooner you confess, the better for you. Enough of these lies. Speak! What were you doing here?"

He looked at us in despair, wringing his hands helplessly.

"I was doing nothing wrong," he whispered. "I was holding a candle in the window."

"And why were you holding it?"

"Please do not ask me that. I give you my word of honour that it is another's secret. I cannot reveal it. If it concerned only myself, I would confess the whole truth to you."

A sudden thought flashed into my mind. I took the candle that Barrymore had placed on the window.

"This is likely an agreed-upon signal," I said. "Let us see what the response will be."

I raised the candle and held it as he had before we entered. Despite the darkness, for the moon was obscured by clouds, the trees were visible, and beyond them, the moor. At that moment, I saw a faint light on the moor.

"There is a signal!" I exclaimed.

"No, Sir, it means nothing," Barrymore interrupted me. "I assure you, it is accidental."

"Move the candle, Watson," cried the baronet. "You see? And that light moves too... Will you still deny, you villain, that you were exchanging signals?... Come here. Tell us, who is your accomplice and what conspiracy are you hatching?"

The butler's face darkened with suppressed anger.

"I will not say!" he declared defiantly. "It is my affair, not yours."

"In that case, leave my house at once!"

"Very well. If it must be so, then so be it."

"And do not let me see your face again! It is a shame, a disgrace!... Your family has served mine for several generations, and you are plotting against me?..."

"No, not against you."

These words were uttered in a woman's voice. On the threshold stood Mrs. Barrymore, even paler than her husband.

"We are leaving here, Eliza," the butler informed her. "Pack our things."

"Oh, John! John! I have ruined you!... It is all my fault, Sir Henry, mine alone... He is not to blame. He did it for me, because I begged him to."

"Speak, Madam, explain what this means!" exclaimed Sir Henry.

"My unfortunate brother is starving there, on the moor... We cannot abandon him... This light is a signal that we have prepared food for him... and that other light indicates where we are to bring it..."

"So your brother is..."

"An escaped convict... a murderer... Selden."

"That is true," Barrymore affirmed. "I told you it was not my secret and that I had no right to reveal it. But now Sir Henry sees that it was not a plot against him..."

Such, then, was the explanation for the nocturnal wanderings and the light in the window.

Sir Henry and I looked at the woman with astonishment. Could it be possible that a person so decent and respectable had the same blood in her veins as the notorious criminal?

"Yes, Sir," she said as if in answer to our thoughts. "My maiden name was Selden, and he is my younger brother... We spoilt him in his childhood years, he was allowed everything, so he came to believe that the world existed for his pleasure... When he grew up, he fell into bad company, began to carouse and even worse... He drove our poor mother to her grave, and dragged our name through the mud. He fell lower and lower, until at last he committed that final crime... But to me, he is always the little boy with bright curls whom I nursed as an older sister. That is why he escaped from prison. He knew that I was here and that I would not refuse him help... He dragged himself to us, exhausted, starved, pursued by the police. What was I to do?... We took him in, locked him in the attic, fed him, clothed him. After His Honour's return, my brother thought he would be safer on the moor, and he is hiding there. From day to day, we expected him to leave these parts, but as long as he is here, we cannot abandon him. If anyone is to blame, it is I, not my husband; he concealed and fed him, for my sake..."

There was sincerity in her voice.

"Is this true, Barrymore?..." asked Sir Henry.

"Yes, Sir, the absolute truth."

"Ha! I cannot fault you for yielding to your wife's pleas. Return both of you to your room. We shall speak of this tomorrow."

We looked out the window again. Sir Henry opened it; a cold wind whipped our faces. Far away on the moor, a faint light glowed.

"It is strange that he does not fear to betray his presence..." said the baronet.

"Perhaps he has positioned the light so that it is visible only from this point."

"How far do you think it is from here?"

"A mile and a half, two at most. As far as I can ascertain, it is near Cleft Tor."

"It cannot be far if Barrymore carries food there every day. Listen, Watson, I shall capture this rogue!"

The same thought had also crossed my mind. After all, Barrymore had not revealed the secret willingly, but under duress; we were therefore under no obligation of secrecy, and all the more so as it concerned a rogue for whom all considerations of sympathy ceased. Our duty was to deliver him into the hands of justice, to prevent him from committing further crimes. Had we spared him, our neighbours, the Stapletons for example, might pay for it with their lives.

Concern for them doubtless influenced Sir Henry's decision.

"I will go with you," I declared.

"Then take your revolver and put on your boots — (we were both barefoot, to tread more silently). The sooner we set out, the better. The rogue might extinguish the light at any moment, and we would not find him in the darkness."

In five minutes, we were ready and set out on that perilous expedition.

The night was cloudy, damp; from time to time the moon emerged from behind the clouds, and as we reached the moor, a fine drizzle began to fall.

The light still glowed.

"Do you have your revolver?" I asked.

"I have a hunting knife," replied Sir Henry.

"We must surprise him, for they say he is as strong as a lion. We shall overpower him before he can offer resistance."

"I wonder what Holmes would say about our expedition," said the baronet. "It is the hour of spirits; they prowl the moor now..." he added half-jestingly.

As if in response to these words, that terrifying sound, which I had once before heard near Grimpen Mire, echoed across the moor. The wind carried it through the night's silence; at first, it was a low growl, which soon transformed into a dreadful howl. The baronet grew pale and clutched my sleeve.

"For God's sake, what is that, Watson?" he whispered.

"I do not know. They say this sound is often heard on the moor," I replied. "I have heard it once before."

Silence fell again, terrifying and ominous. We stood listening, but no sound reached our ears.

"Watson..." the baronet whispered, "that was the barking of a dog!..."

His voice held suppressed fear.

"How do the local inhabitants explain this dreadful howling?" he asked.

"Who pays heed to what simple folk say?"

"Tell me nevertheless, what do they say?"

I hesitated.

"They say it is the barking of the Hound of the Baskervilles," I replied.

He was silent for a long time.

"Yes, it was a dog," he said at last. "It barked very far away, towards Grimpen Mire..."

"It is difficult to determine whence the sound came."

"I tell you it was from there, Watson. And what do you think? Was it barking?... I am not a child. You can tell me the truth."

"The first time I heard that sound was when I was walking with Stapleton. He explained to me that it was the call of a rare bird."

"No, no, that was a dog. Could the legend truly be founded on real facts? Could I truly be in danger?... What do you think of it, Watson?"

"I am sure you are not."

"Hm! It was one thing to laugh at those tales in London, quite another to stand here, in the darkness of the moor, and hear that terrifying sound. My poor uncle! The paw prints of a large dog were clearly seen near his corpse, were they not?... All this connects. I am no coward, Watson, but that barking froze the blood in my veins. Touch my hand."

It was cold as marble.

"Tomorrow you will laugh at this adventure," I said, to reassure him.

"I doubt it; that sound will remain in my memory forever. What do you advise me to do?"

"Return home."

"No. We came here to capture a murderer, and we shall not turn back halfway. Let us go! Come what may."

We walked slowly through the darkness. The faint light still glowed at a single point. At times it seemed close to us, then again very distant. Finally, we ascertained the direction from which it shone.

Not far from us, in a crevice between two rocks, protecting it from the wind, stood a candle in a holder. It was not visible from any other point, only from the direction of Baskerville Hall. The rock formation concealed us from the fugitive's eyes. Creeping cautiously, we crawled up to the candle.

"What now?" whispered Sir Henry.

"Let us wait. He must be close by. We must look. Perhaps we shall see him."

Indeed, no sooner had I uttered these words than a monstrous, bestial face, ravaged by savage passions, yellow as wax, appeared to us in the rock crevice, above the candle. The criminal's face was overgrown with hair up to his eyes. Thus, no doubt, looked our ancestors, who inhabited these moors in prehistoric times.

The murderer cast anxious glances around, like a beast that hears the sound of a hunt.

Something had evidently aroused his suspicion. Perhaps Barrymore was accustomed to giving him a signal of which we were unaware, or perhaps the villain had some other reason for alarm; in any case, fear was painted on his savage face.

At any moment, he might draw back and vanish into the darkness. I sprang from my hiding place, Sir Henry following close behind. The criminal swore terribly and hurled a huge stone. It shattered against the rock we had leaned against but a moment before. By a fortunate coincidence, the moon just then broke through the clouds and illuminated the moor.

We ran down the hill, chasing Selden, who fled at top speed. He leaped from stone to stone, from rock to rock, like a wild goat.

I could have brought the criminal down at once with a shot from my revolver, but I had taken it for defence in case of attack, not for killing an defenceless man.

Both Sir Henry and I are excellent runners; we soon realised, however, that we would not be able to overtake him. In the moonlight, we saw his broad shoulders and bowed legs for a long time, until at last he appeared to us as a tiny speck on the edge of the horizon.

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English, aiming for a style appropriate for a classic detective novel like those by Arthur Conan Doyle, reflecting Dr. Watson's narrative voice:

***

We ran until we were utterly out of breath, but the distance between us and the fleeing Seldon steadily grew. Finally, breathless, we sat down on a rock, watching him until he vanished from our sight.

It was at this very moment that something strange and unexpected occurred. Having rested, we were rising to return home, for we had already abandoned the pursuit. The full moon was setting behind one of the higher rocks; it was then that I saw a male figure on its summit, looking like a statue.

Do not imagine this was an illusion. As far as I could tell, it was a tall, slender man. He stood with his arms crossed, his head bowed, as if gazing into the empty expanse.

Perhaps it was the marsh spirit... Be that as it may, it was not Seldon, for he had disappeared just moments before in the exact opposite direction. Besides, that figure was much taller and more slender.

I wished to show this apparition to the baronet, but the moment I turned, the figure had already vanished. The rocks stood out against the moon's disc, but the living statue was no longer upon their summit.

I wanted to go and investigate what it was, but the baronet had no desire for new experiences. He had not seen the strange phenomenon and tried to convince me that I had imagined it, as he had not felt the impression that had shaken me to the core.

"That's probably some local guard. The moor is swarming with them ever since Seldon escaped from prison."

Ha! Who knows if such an explanation is true; I would, however, like to confirm it.

Today we intend to inform the prison authorities in Princetown where to search for the fugitive. It's a pity, however, that we couldn't capture him ourselves.

Such were the adventures of last night. You must admit, Holmes, that my report is very detailed and accurate. Many facts remain to be explained; I present them to you without commentary, so as not to hinder you in drawing your own conclusions.

We have advanced on the path of discovery. We now know the reason for the Barrymores' nocturnal wanderings—and this simplifies the situation.

But the moor still holds many unexplained mysteries. Perhaps in my next letter, I shall be able to shed light upon them. It would be best if you could come yourself.

***

### X.

### Extract from Dr. Watson's Diary.

Up to this point in my narrative, I have relied upon the letters written to Sherlock Holmes. Henceforth, to refresh my memory, I must consult my diary from that period. I shall quote a few passages, starting from the day following our pursuit.

_October 16th._

A fine drizzle falls ceaselessly. The entire house is enveloped in thick fog; it lifts and falls, revealing the pasture and the moor. Both within the Hall and without, there is gloom.

The baronet is experiencing a reaction after yesterday's excitement. I myself feel a strange unease; I almost perceive an approaching danger, and it is all the more menacing because we cannot define it.

There is no lack of reasons for apprehension. A whole series of circumstances have combined to arouse a superstitious dread within us: firstly, the mysterious death of the previous owner of this residence; then, the rumours circulating in the vicinity; and finally, those enigmatic sounds on the moor. I have heard them twice with my own ears...

All this breaks with the ordinary order of things and the laws of nature: a spectral, legendary hound leaves footprints and howls terrifyingly. Even Stapleton believes in its existence, and Dr. Mortimer, despite his knowledge, is convinced that he has seen some supernatural creature.

Though I am not a man of science like these two gentlemen, I cannot, however, bring myself to believe it; that would be to descend to the intellectual level of the local peasants, who are ready to swear they have seen a dog breathing fire and brimstone.

Holmes would not even listen to such fables—and I ought to be deaf to them.

But facts are facts, and with my own ears, I have twice heard barking on the moor. Suppose there is some wild dog out there—that would be an explanation for all these mysteries.

But where does such a dog hide? Where does it find food? Why does no one see it by day?...

Leaving aside supernatural factors in this matter, human activity remains: that pale man following us from the cab, and the warning sent to Sir Henry. These are real facts, yet that stranger could be either a friend or an enemy. Where does he reside now? Has he remained in London? Or is he tracking us here? Perhaps he was that tall, slender man whom I saw in the moonlight atop the rock?

Admittedly, I saw him very indistinctly and fleetingly, but I am certain it was no one from the vicinity, for I already know all the neighbours. He was taller than Stapleton, more slender than Frankland. It could have been Barrymore; but we left him at home, and he certainly did not go out after us.

Therefore, some stranger is tracking us—presumably the same one as in London. If I could manage to apprehend him, perhaps that would explain all these mysteries. I shall exert all my energy to achieve this goal.

At first, I intended to confide my plans to Sir Henry, but upon reflection, I abandoned that intention. The baronet is agitated—I do not wish to increase his anxiety. I shall act on my own.

This afternoon we had a minor incident. Barrymore requested an audience with Sir Henry. They conversed with the study doors closed. Sitting in the billiard room, I heard clipped words and surmised what was happening. After a while, the baronet opened the door and called for me.

"Barrymore holds a grievance against us," he said. "He feels we acted improperly towards him by pursuing Seldon, considering he voluntarily confided the secret to us."

The butler stood before us, paler than usual, and it was clear he was restraining himself with difficulty.

"Perhaps I expressed myself too sharply," he said, excusing himself. "I beg your pardon, Sir. But truthfully, I was surprised that gentlemen like yourselves would wish to apprehend Seldon. That unfortunate man has enough trouble with the police, and he surely doesn't expect to be pursued by gentlemen..."

"Had you confided in us of your own free will, it would be another matter," the baronet reasoned with him, "but you told us—or rather, your wife told us—the truth under duress, so our hands are tied."

"I did not imagine you would take advantage of that, Sir..."

"This man is a menace to the entire neighbourhood. There are many isolated houses on the pasture and the moor, for instance, Mr. Stapleton's villa: it stands apart. In case of an attack, who would come to their aid?... As long as this rogue roams here, no one's life is safe."

"He will not attack any house. I stake my honour on it, Sir. Besides, in a few days he will leave these parts. We have already made preparations to send him to South America. For God's sake, I beg you, gentlemen, do not hand him over to the police!"

"What do you say to that, Watson?" Sir Henry asked me.

I shrugged my shoulders.

"If he indeed intends to leave England, it will free the country from supporting one more rogue," I replied.

"But can we be certain that he will not harm anyone before his departure?"

"Sir, that would be madness on his part. We have provided him with everything he needs. A new crime would only bring the police back on his trail."

"That is true," Sir Henry conceded, "and so, Barrymore..."

"May God reward you for this, Sir," the butler interrupted, with a sincere burst of gratitude. "My wife would not survive such a disgrace a second time..."

"We are simply favouring and assisting a rogue... But I do not wish to drive Mrs. Barrymore to her grave... and if Seldon leaves these parts and behaves quietly, I shall remain silent."

The butler bowed deeply and headed towards the door, but he hesitated and approached Sir Henry once more.

"You have been so good to me, Sir," he whispered, "that I would wish to repay you according to my ability. I know something and should have told you earlier, but I discovered it after the investigation was concluded. It concerns Sir Charles's death..."

Sir Henry and I both sprang to our feet.

"You know how he died?..." the baronet inquired.

"No, Sir, that I do not know."

"Then what?"

"I know why he was at the gate at that hour. He was waiting for a woman."

"For a woman? He?..."

"Yes, Sir."

"What is her name?"

"I do not know her name; I can only provide the first initials."

"How do you know them, Barrymore?"

"Sir Charles received a letter that morning. He usually received many letters, as his generosity was well known, and everyone in trouble would turn to him. But that day there was only this one letter, so I noticed it. It bore the Coombe-Tracey postmark, and the address was written in a woman's hand."

"And what then?"

"I had already forgotten about that detail when, a few weeks ago, my wife, tidying Sir Charles's study—(it had remained untouched since his death)—well, my wife found in the fireplace ashes an unburnt fragment of a letter; on it were written the words: 'I beg and implore you, that you burn this letter and come to the gate at ten o'clock.' Below were the letters _L. L._"

"Do you have this unburnt fragment?"

"No; when we moved it, it crumbled."

"Did Sir Charles receive previous letters written in such a hand?"

"I did not examine his correspondence, and I would not have noticed this letter had it arrived with the rest of the post."

"Do you not know who this _L. L._ might be?"

"No, Sir; I believe, however, that if we could discover this, we would learn something more about Sir Charles's death."

"I do not understand, Barrymore, how you could have kept silent about such an important detail..."

"I had my own troubles—the difficulty with Seldon, and besides, we were both very fond of Sir Charles, so we preferred to keep silent about this discovery; it could no longer help our poor master, and where a woman is involved, it is better to be cautious."

"You feared it might harm his reputation?"

"Yes. But now that you have shown us so much kindness, Sir, I consider it my duty to confess this to you."

"Very well, Barrymore, you may go now."

Once the door closed behind the butler, Sir Henry turned to me:

"Well, Watson, what do you say to this new light?"

"It only increases the darkness that surrounds us on all sides."

"I think so too. But if we could trace who _L. L._ is, perhaps that would illuminate the entire matter. Be that as it may, we have gained this much: we know there is someone who can explain to us the cause of Sir Charles's death. What do you think we ought to do now?"

"First and foremost, we must inform Holmes of this. We shall give him a key he has sought for so long; I am almost certain he will know how to use it."

I immediately went to my room and wrote down our morning conversation to send it to Holmes.

Lately, he had evidently been very busy; I had received short letters from him, without any comments on what I reported to him, almost without mention of our mission. The case of exploitation completely absorbs him, and yet so many strange things are happening here that he might take a keener interest in them.

_October 17th._

The rain fell throughout the day. I thought of the murderer on the moor. He had sinned grievously, it is true, but he was also paying a heavy penance for his crime. Then I reflected upon the mysterious stranger who had followed us from the cab. If it was he who appeared to me against the moon's disc, he must now be getting wet. In the evening, I took my coat and went out onto the moor. The wind whipped my face, and the rain poured down my collar. I reached Black-Tor rock, on the summit of which the stranger had then stood. From its heights, I looked out over the grey plain.

To the left, amidst dense clouds, the turrets of Baskerville Hall loomed above the trees. These were the only signs of life; all around was emptiness and silence, nowhere could I discern traces of that spectral figure I had glimpsed a few days ago.

On my way back, I encountered Dr. Mortimer. He was driving a trap. The good doctor shows us much kindness, visiting us almost daily. He invited me into his vehicle and drove me home. I noticed that he was sad; he complained to me that his favourite little dog was lost: it had run out onto the moor and not returned. I tried to console him, asserting that it would be found, but I recalled the foal that had sunk before my eyes in the Grimpen Mire. I doubt the doctor will see his favourite again.

"Surely you know everyone here?" I queried the doctor.

"I believe so," he replied.

"Could you not name for me a woman whose initials are: _L. L._?"

He searched his memory.

"No," he said finally. "There are, to be sure, a few gypsy families about whom I know nothing, but I know all the local farmers and residents by name. Wait a moment..." he said suddenly. "There is Laura Lyons—initials _L. L._, but she lives in Coombe-Tracey."

"Who is she?" I asked.

"Old Frankland's daughter."

"How so? That eccentric has a daughter, then?"

"Yes. She married an artist named Lyons, who came here to paint the local scenery. He abandoned his wife, though they say she is not without fault herself. Her father disowned her. The poor woman has a difficult life..."

"How does she support herself?"

"Old Frankland pays her a certain sum monthly, but not much, as his own affairs are tangled. It was impossible to simply abandon her and let her utterly waste away. Several people from the neighbourhood endeavoured to provide her with honest work. Stapleton, Sir Charles, and I myself did what we could for her. A typewriter was purchased for her, and in this way, she earns a living."

Dr. Mortimer inquired about the reason for my investigations; I satisfied his curiosity without telling him the truth: why should so many people know about that letter?

Tomorrow morning I shall ride to Coombe-Tracey, and if I succeed in seeing Mrs. Laura Lyons, of dubious reputation, one link will be severed from the mysterious chain. I am acquiring cunning: when Dr. Mortimer pressed, wishing to know why I was interested in Mrs. Lyons, I cunningly asked him what type of skull Mr. Frankland possessed; thanks to this, for the rest of our journey, I heard of nothing else but craniology. Not for nothing have I spent so many years in the company of Sherlock Holmes.

It only remains for me to record one more fact from that day, namely, my conversation with Barrymore. He gave me a new advantage. I intend to use it.

Mortimer remained for dinner, then both he and the baronet played _écarté_. The butler brought me coffee to the library; I took the opportunity to ask him a few questions.

"Well, has Seldon left these parts yet?" I said, "or is he still roaming?"

"I expect he is no longer here; he has given no sign of life since the day I last took him food."

"Did you see him then?"

"No, Sir, but there were no provisions left when I came the second time."

"So Seldon took them?"

"One might presume so; unless the other man took them..."

I looked at the butler with surprise.

"So you know that another man is hiding on the moor?"

"Yes, Sir, I do."

"Have you seen him?"

"No."

"How do you know of him?"

"Seldon told me a week ago. That man is also in hiding, but as far as I can ascertain, he is not a convict. I do not like that at all..." he added mysteriously.

"Listen, Barrymore," I said. "I have come here in your master's interest. Tell me frankly: what is it you dislike?"

He hesitated, as if regretting his utterance, or unable to find words to express his thoughts.

"Some danger threatens Sir Henry..." he said at last. "It would be best if he were to leave for London."

"What has alarmed you?"

"I will tell you frankly, Sir: I foresee a new misfortune... Why is that other man hiding on the moor?... That bodes no good for the Baskervilles. I wish a new staff would relieve me of the care of the Hall."

"Could you tell me anything about this stranger? What does Seldon think of him? Has he found his hiding place? Has he learned what he is doing here?"

"He has seen him a few times, but the man is secretive. At first, my brother-in-law took him for a spy, but he soon realised that he was a gentleman and was acting independently for some mysterious purpose."

"Has Seldon not discovered his hiding place?"

"He knows the stranger is hiding in one of the caves on the hillside, where ancient people used to live."

"And how does he get food?"

"Seldon observed that some boy supplies him with everything. This boy goes to Coombe-Tracey."

"Very well, Barrymore. We shall speak of this again."

After the butler's departure, I approached the window and looked out at the dark pasture. The night was cold and windy. What motives could induce a man to hide on the moor at this time of year?... There, in that cave, lies the key to the mystery. I swore to myself that I must discover it, and within twenty-four hours.

***

### XI.

### The Stranger Hiding in the Cave.

The extract from the diary, forming the last chapter of my narrative, brought me to October 18th, that is, to the day when these strange events began to unravel. The facts of the following days remained so vividly in my memory that I can recount them without consulting my notes.

I shall therefore begin from the day following that on which I discovered two very important facts: firstly, that Mrs. Laura Lyons of Coombe-Tracey wrote to Sir Charles Baskerville and appointed him a meeting at the hour in which he met his death; secondly, that the man residing on the moor is hiding in one of the caves on the hillside.

Knowing these two facts, I held in my hand a weapon that could help me explain this bloody mystery.

I could not share the information I had gained with the baronet, for Dr. Mortimer remained until late at night. The next day, however, at breakfast, I recounted these circumstances to Sir Henry and asked if he wished to accompany me to Coombe-Tracey.

At first, he was inclined to go, but upon reflection, we both agreed that it would be better for me to set out on this expedition alone. It was necessary to strip the visit of any formal character. So I left Sir Henry at home and went on a reconnaissance mission.

It was easy enough to ascertain Mrs. Lyons's address. She lived in a good location, in the middle of the town. I was immediately shown into the sitting-room by a neat maid. Mrs. Lyons was seated at a Remington typewriter; she rose upon my entry, but seeing a stranger, she became flustered and asked my business.

At first glance, Mrs. Lyons struck me as an exceptionally beautiful person: she had golden-brown eyes and hair, a fresh complexion, and crimson lips. I was captivated by her beauty, but upon closer inspection, I discerned a sharp expression about her mouth and eyes, marring the overall harmony. Be that as it may, I found myself facing a beautiful woman, and only now did I feel that my task was difficult. What could I say to her?

"I know your father," I said, explaining my presence.

"There is nothing in common between my father and me," she replied coolly. "I owe him nothing whatsoever, and his acquaintances are not mine. Were it not for Sir Charles Baskerville and a few other friends, I should have starved, even though I have a father..."

"I have come to you precisely concerning the late Sir Charles," I stated.

She looked at me with surprise.

"What can I tell you about him?" she said, toying with her watch chain.

"Surely you knew him?"

"I have already told you that I owe him a great deal. If I am able to work for my own living, it is primarily due to his kindness to me."

"Did you correspond with him?"

A strange glint ignited in her eyes.

"Why do you ask me that?" she said sharply.

"To spare you a public scandal. It is better that I learn the truth, than for it to be revealed to the world..."

She remained silent for a long time; finally, she looked at me with suppressed anger.

"Very well, I shall answer," she said. "What is it you wish to know?"

"Did you correspond with Sir Charles?" I repeated my question.

As a professional book translator, here is the English translation of the provided Polish text:

***

“Naturally, I wrote to him to thank him for his kindness and generosity.”

“Did you remember the dates of your letters?”

“No.”

“Did you ever see Sir Charles?”

“Yes, a few times, when he came to Coombe Tracey. He lived in seclusion. He liked to do good deeds in secret…”

“If he saw you so rarely and received infrequent letters from you, how could he have been so well-informed about your affairs as to come to your aid, as you yourself stated?”

She replied to me without hesitation:

“Several neighbours knew my sad story; they banded together to help me; among others, Mr. Stapleton, a friend of Sir Charles, was very good to me. Through him, the baronet learned of my difficult situation.”

I knew, indeed, that Sir Charles had made Stapleton his almoner, so I believed her words.

“Did you ever write to Sir Charles, asking to see him for a private meeting?” I continued.

Mrs. Lyons flushed.

“That’s a strange question…” she said, feigning offence.

“I’m sorry, but I must repeat it.”

“Very well then – no; I never arranged meetings with him.”

“Not even on the day of Sir Charles’s death?…” I said with emphasis.

The flush vanished from her face; in an instant, she turned deathly pale. Her lips moved soundlessly, and she whispered ‘no’ so softly that I rather guessed than heard the word.

“Perhaps your memory fails you…” I said, “because I could even quote a passage from your letter, namely: ‘I beg and implore you to burn this letter and present yourself at the gate at ten in the evening.’”

She was on the verge of fainting, but she mastered herself.

“So there are no gentlemen left in England!…” she whispered bitterly.

“You wrong the memory of Sir Charles,” I said. “He burned that letter, but a letter can be read even after being burned… Do you admit to these words?”

“Yes, I wrote them!” she cried suddenly. “I wrote them. I don’t need to deny it! I have no reason to be ashamed. I wanted to ask Sir Charles for help. I thought he would grant it to me after a private conversation, and that’s why I asked him to come to the gate.”

“But why at such an hour?…”

“Because I had just learned that he was leaving for London the next day and that his absence would last several months. There were reasons why I couldn’t come earlier.”

“Why did you arrange to meet him in the garden, and not at the Hall?”

“Do you think a woman can visit an unmarried man with impunity at such an hour?”

“And what happened when you arrived at the gate?”

“I didn’t turn up at all.”

“Mrs. Lyons, I find that hard to believe.”

“I swear to you by everything I hold sacred and dear that I am telling the truth. I didn’t go because something prevented me.”

“What was that?”

“It’s a personal, private matter. I cannot say.”

“So you admit that you arranged to meet Sir Charles at the hour and place where he was found dead; yet you deny having shown up at the appointed spot…”

“I am telling the truth.”

I asked her a few more questions, hoping to prompt her confessions, but in vain.

“Mrs. Lyons,” I said, standing up, “you are taking on a great responsibility and placing yourself in a difficult position. If I am forced to call in the police, only then will you realize how seriously you are compromised. If you were innocent, you would not have denied at first that you wrote to Sir Charles that day.”

“I denied it for fear that false conclusions would be drawn and that I would be embroiled in a scandal.”

“And why were you so anxious for Sir Charles to burn that letter?”

“If you read it, you must know why.”

“I didn’t say I read the entire letter.”

“You quoted one passage verbatim.”

“Yes, the postscript. The letter, as I already mentioned, was burned and could not be read. Once again I ask you: why did you insist that Sir Charles burn the letter he received on the day of his death?”

“It’s a purely personal matter.”

“All the more reason for you to wish to avoid a public inquiry.”

“Very well, I will tell you. You have doubtless heard of my sad story and must know that I married too hastily and had reason to regret it.”

“I have heard.”

“My life has been a series of persecutions from my husband, whom I detest. The law is on his side. Lyons can demand that I live with him at any moment. Before writing that letter to Sir Charles, I had just learned that there was a way to regain my freedom, but that it required considerable expense. It would have meant peace, happiness, everything in the world to me. I knew Sir Charles’s generosity and believed that once he heard my sad story from my own lips, he would undoubtedly help me.”

“Then why did you not go to the appointed place?”

“Because I received help from another source.”

“Why then did you not inform Sir Charles of this?”

“I would have done so, had I not read the news of his death in the papers the next day.”

Mrs. Lyons’s words were fairly logically connected; I could not catch her in a contradiction. It only remained to verify whether she had indeed taken divorce proceedings at that time.

I believed that she had not been at Baskerville Hall that night, for horses and a vehicle would have been seen at the gate; such an excursion would not have remained a secret. Mrs. Lyons was therefore telling the truth, or part of the truth.

I left discouraged. So I was once again crashing against a wall, blocking the further path of discovery! Yet, the more I recalled every feature of her face and every word, the more certain I was that she had not told me everything.

For why had she turned pale at first? Why had she not immediately admitted to the letter?… Undoubtedly, she was more guilty than she presented herself to be.

I had to temporarily content myself with her information and turn elsewhere for more – towards the caves of our prehistoric ancestors.

But it was not easy to find the unknown man based on a vague clue. Barrymore had told me that the stranger was hiding in one of the caves, but there were countless such caves everywhere. However, I remembered the rock on which a figure had appeared to me in the moonlight. This rock, Black-Tor (Black Gate), was to serve as my guide. I was to begin my search from it. I vowed to myself that I would find the stranger and that he would have to confess why he was here. It would have been easier for him to escape on Regent Street than on this open moor. He had slipped through the fingers of the great Holmes. What a triumph it would be for me if I managed to capture him!

So far, luck had not been on my side in my investigation – but now it smiled upon me. The harbinger of good news was Mr. Frankland.

He was standing at the gate of his garden, which rose alongside the highway.

“Good day, Dr. Watson!” he accosted me as I was passing his residence. “Let your horses rest, and pray step in for a glass of wine.”

I held no friendly feelings towards him after what I had heard about his treatment of his daughter, but I wished to dismiss Perkins the groom with the trap and horses as quickly as possible. Taking advantage of the opportunity, I dismounted and sent word to Sir Henry that I would return only for dinner and would come on foot.

I entered Frankland’s house.

“Congratulate me!” he exclaimed at the outset. “This is a memorable day for me; I shall mark it with a red letter, for it has brought me double satisfaction: firstly, it has given me the opportunity to show them that one cannot trample on the law with impunity: I have discovered a document proving that a public right of way should run through old Middleton’s park, a hundred yards from the manor house. I shall teach these magnates that they are not permitted to deprive common mortals of what is rightfully theirs. They imagine that the right of property exists only for them. I have not had such a pleasant day since I sued Sir John Morland for illegal hunting in his own forest. That case cost me two hundred pounds, but I won it, for on the basis of old records I proved that this part of the forest belonged to the peasants. I must explain to you that I was not at all interested. I always act for the public good. And here, this second matter does not concern me personally, yet I have discovered something very important.”

A moment ago, I thought: under what pretext could I slip away from the eccentric; now he was beginning to interest me, but knowing his perverse nature, I knew he would tell me nothing if I betrayed my curiosity.

“Is it perhaps about some new lawsuit?” I said indifferently.

“Ho, ho! My boy, you guess wrongly. You have doubtless heard of the escaped convict hiding on the moor?”

I started involuntarily.

“Do you by any chance know his hiding-place?” I inquired.

“I couldn’t pinpoint it exactly, but my indications would be of service to the police. Has it not occurred to you that the only way to capture this villain is to track where and from whom he gets his food; by such a trail, it is easiest to reach his hiding-place.”

The reasoning was very logical.

“Undoubtedly,” I replied, “but how do you know he is hiding on the moor?”

“I know, because I saw with my own eyes the one who brings him provisions.”

I grew anxious about Barrymore. It was dangerous to fall prey to the perverse old man. His next words lifted a weight from my heart.

“You’ll be surprised to hear that it’s a child who delivers him food,” he said. “I see the small boy through my telescope, placed on the roof. He always takes the same path, at the same hour. And where else would he be going, and why, if not to provision the prisoner?”

Thank God! Frankland was on the wrong track. I feigned indifference to this information.

Barrymore had already told me that a boy attended to the unknown man. So Frankland had discovered the trail of the mysterious figure, not Seldon. If I could extract more facts from him, it would save me time and trouble. Only disbelief could induce Frankland to give me more detailed information.

Seeing that I attached no importance to his words, he became enraged, flushed even more deeply, and looked at me maliciously.

“So you doubt me?” he exclaimed. “Look straight ahead. Do you see the rock called Black-Tor? It juts out from a bare hill, amidst a wild, stony expanse. Do you think this boy is a shepherd? Let me tell you that assumption is absurd. There isn’t a blade of grass there, so what would a flock graze on, and without a flock, there’s no shepherd.”

I replied humbly that I admitted the inaccuracy of my hypothesis. This disarmed him, inclining him to further confidences.

“Believe me, before I express my judgment, I try to base it on certain facts. I see the boy with a parcel every day, sometimes twice a day. Wait a moment. If my eyes do not deceive me, something is moving on the hill…”

Several miles separated us from the given spot, but I could clearly discern a black speck.

“Come, come,” cried Frankland, running upstairs. “You will see with your own eyes and be convinced that I am not speaking idly!”

An enormous telescope was set up on the roof. Frankland looked through it and cried out with joy:

“Hurry, Doctor, or he will pass to the other side of the hill!…”

Indeed, I saw the little fellow, carrying a parcel on his back. He climbed uphill slowly. When he reached the summit, I clearly saw his small figure silhouetted against the sky. He looked around, as if fearing pursuit, then descended the other slope.

“Well then? Am I right?” inquired Frankland.

“Yes, I saw the boy with my own eyes; from his behaviour, one can tell that he is performing some secret mission.”

“And what kind, it’s easy to guess… But I won’t breathe a word to the police, and I ask you for secrecy. Not a word, remember!…”

“If that’s what you wish…”

“Yes, I want to spite them. They treated me villainously in the case against the peasants. I have no intention of helping the constables. Are you leaving already?… I won’t let you! We must ‘wet’ this discovery.”

However, I could not be persuaded and managed to dissuade him from accompanying me to Baskerville Hall. I kept to the highway as long as he could see me, then turned aside and headed towards the hill over which the boy had passed.

Everything was in my favour; I decided to take advantage of the circumstances and uncover this mystery today.

The sun was already in the west when I reached the summit of the hill. The entire moor was steeped in graveyard silence. The boy was nowhere to be seen. Looking around among the scattered stones, I noticed three so arranged that they could serve as a hiding-place. My heart beat faster. The unknown man had to be here.

Approaching, I observed two stones standing vertically; one lay horizontally upon them. I entered this rocky lair, and I confess, with some apprehension. The place was empty, but there were traces that a human being had inhabited it. On a flat, hollowed-out stone, which had probably served prehistoric man as a bed, there was a blanket wrapped in a plaid, and on the ground, ashes from an extinguished campfire remained; beside them were small saucepans and a tin kettle with water. In another corner, I spotted a bottle of gin. In the centre was a flat stone, like a table; on it lay a parcel – presumably the same one I had seen on the boy’s back through the telescope. I untied it – inside was a loaf of bread, a smoked tongue, and two jars of fruit preserves. Beneath the provisions lay a piece of paper. I took it into my hands and by the light of a match, I read these words, scrawled in pencil, by an unpracticed hand:

– “Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Tracey.”

For a moment, I stood with the paper in my hand, not understanding the meaning of this message. So it was not Sir Henry who was being trailed, but me… The mysterious stranger, unable to track me himself, had entrusted this task to the boy. He was presumably reporting my every move.

I looked for other papers, but in vain; nor could I find anything that would enlighten me about the intentions of the man who had chosen such a strange place of residence. At any rate, he displayed Spartan habits… On rainy days, water must surely have dripped on his head, he must have been chilled to the bone on cold nights, yet he did not abandon his hiding-place. An important purpose must have held him captive in this lair… I swore to myself that I would not leave here until I found out whether this man was our friend or enemy.

The sun was already sinking low, in a glow of gold and purple; on one side stood the towers of Baskerville Hall, on the other were the Grimpen Mire bogs, and to the right, Stapleton’s house rose up. Peace was spread across nature; only my soul was agitated. I sat at the entrance of the cave and waited for the arrival of its occupant.

At last, the sound of his footsteps reached me. I slipped into the darkest corner and drew my revolver from my pocket. The footsteps ceased; suddenly, a shadow obscured the opening.

“We have a beautiful evening, my dear Watson,” said a voice well known to me. “I fancy you will be more comfortable in the open air than in here…”

***

**XII. Death on the Moor.**

For a moment, I sat holding my breath, disbelieving my own eyes; at last, I regained my voice, my presence of mind returned, and simultaneously a weight of responsibility fell from my heart. Only one man in the world possessed such an ironic, cool voice.

“Sherlock!” I exclaimed.

“Come out, and I beg you, be careful with that revolver.”

I stood in the rocky opening and saw Holmes a few paces before me. He was sitting on a stone, looking at me cheerfully. He was pale and emaciated, his face weathered, yet his linen was so clean and his beard so meticulously shaven, as if he were in his own rooms on Baker Street.

“How glad I am it’s you!” I exclaimed, gripping his hand.

“And are you not surprised?” he inquired.

“I confess that I am.”

“And I too am surprised,” he replied. “I did not expect you to find my hiding-place, much less to find you here. I only became aware of your presence when I was twenty paces from this cave.”

“Did you recognise me by my footprints?”

“No, Watson, I would not be able to distinguish your tracks from others. But if you wish to mislead me, I advise you to use other cigarettes, for whenever I see a cigarette holder with the Broadley, Oxford Street brand mark, I always surmise that my friend Watson is nearby. Look, you dropped a cigarette end, presumably at the moment you decided to enter this cave.”

“Indeed.”

“I presumed as much, and knowing your courage, I was certain that you had lain in wait with revolver in hand, expecting the return of this dwelling’s ‘occupant’. So you thought I was the criminal?”

“I didn’t know who you were, but I vowed to uncover the mystery.”

“When did you learn about another person’s presence on the moor? Did you perhaps spot me that night, when I was so careless as to stand silhouetted against the moon’s disc?”

“Yes, I saw you then.”

“And doubtless you looked under every stone before you stumbled upon my hiding-place?”

“No; your boy was spotted, and that served as my guide.”

“The old gentleman must have spotted him through his telescope. When I first saw the glint from the lens, I couldn’t make out what it was.”

He rose and entered the cave.

“Ha! I see Cartwright has brought me provisions… And there’s the scrawled paper. So you went to Coombe Tracey?”

“Yes.”

“To speak with Mrs. Laura Lyons?”

“Exactly.”

“Good. Very good! Our inquiries have run on parallel lines, and when we combine our investigations, we must reach the bottom of the truth.”

“I’m immensely glad you’re here, for my nerves were beginning to fail me. But how did you come to be on the moor, and what are you doing here? I thought you were sitting quietly on Baker Street, occupied with that exploitation case.”

“I wanted you to think so.”

“So you’re using me for work, and yet you don’t trust me…” I exclaimed bitterly. “I fancy I have deserved your trust.”

“My dear fellow, you are simply invaluable; on many occasions, you have rendered me excellent service. I am grateful to you and hope you will forgive this stratagem. I adopted it partly on your account: knowing the danger to which you were exposing yourself, I wished to investigate it myself, on the spot. Had I been with you and Sir Henry, I should doubtless have shared your views on the matter, and my presence would have forced our adversary to redouble his vigilance. As things stand, I have accomplished what I could not have done living at Baskerville Hall, and moreover, I remain in hiding. When the need arises, I shall emerge with full energy and force.”

“But why did you conceal yourself from me?”

“Because otherwise, you would not have refrained from communicating with me; you would have insisted on supplying me with better food and warmer clothing, and you would have led them to my trail. I brought Cartwright with me – you remember that little fellow from the hotel – he saw to my needs: he brought me bread and clean linen. What more could I require? Besides, he provides me with a pair of keen eyes and a pair of nimble legs, which is desirable.”

“So my letters were unnecessary?”

Holmes produced a packet of letters.

“Here are your reports,” he said. “I received them with a 24-hour delay and they have rendered me considerable service. I must commend you for the zeal and shrewdness you have shown in this unusual case.”

Holmes’s cordial words dispelled my resentment towards him, especially as I felt that it was better that I had not known of his presence on the moor.

“And now tell me about your visit to Mrs. Lyons,” he said. “It was not difficult for me to surmise that you had gone to her, as I know that she alone in Coombe Tracey can provide us with the necessary information. To be sure, had you not spoken with her today, I would have gone to her myself tomorrow.”

The sun had already set, and the air had grown cool. We entered the cave. Sitting on a stone beside Holmes, I recounted my conversation with Mrs. Lyons.

Here is the translation of the Polish book excerpt into English, aiming for the professional quality and style expected of a published book translation:

-- "That is a very important detail," he confirmed. "It fills a gap I was unable to bridge. You are doubtless aware that there exist very close relations between that lady and Stapleton, are you not?"

-- "I was not."

-- "It is a certainty. They meet, they correspond, they are on cordial terms. This piece of information is a dangerous weapon in our hands. If only we could turn his wife against Stapleton!"

-- "His wife?"

-- "Now I shall give you a snippet of information in return for that which you have furnished me. The lady who passes here for Miss Stapleton is, in truth, his wife."

-- "That's impossible! Would he allow Sir Henry to court his own wife...?"

-- "What does it matter to him if Sir Henry falls in love? He, for his part, as you yourself observed, took every pains to prevent Sir Henry from displaying or expressing his feelings. I repeat to you: this beautiful lady is not Stapleton's sister, but his wife."

-- "Then why this comedy?"

-- "Stapleton foresaw that she could be of service to him in the capacity of an unattached woman."

All my suspicions revived. This cold, impenetrable man, for whom I had felt an instinctive aversion from the first moment, now appeared to me a monster with a sweet smile.

-- "He, and no other, is our enemy; it was he who tracked us in London!" Holmes declared.

-- "And the warning, I presume, came from her?"

-- "Undoubtedly," my friend confirmed.

-- "How did you learn that this woman is his wife?" I asked.

-- "By virtue of the fact that he himself let slip a certain detail of his life to you; I fancy he must have regretted that indiscretion. At your first meeting, he mentioned he had once been a schoolmaster in the north of England. Now, there is nothing simpler than tracing a schoolmaster. There are educational agencies through which one can learn the details of any teacher's life, and still more so a headmaster's. After a brief inquiry, I discovered that one school had been closed due to dreadful irregularities. Its headmaster's name was different; this man disappeared without a trace. The description fitted, and when I further learned that this headmaster was passionately devoted to entomology, all my doubts vanished."

-- "If this woman is indeed his wife, what then is his relationship with Mrs. Lyons?"

-- "Your conversation with that lady has just shed light on that obscure point. I was unaware that Mrs. Lyons wished to divorce. Evidently, she hopes to marry Stapleton."

-- "And if she is disappointed in these hopes?"

-- "Ha! Then she will fall into our hands. First and foremost, we must both see her tomorrow. But do you not find, Watson, that you have left your charge too long unattended? Your place is now at Baskerville Hall."

The last rays of the sun were dying in the west.

-- "One more question," I said, rising. "Surely there should be no secrets between us. Tell me, what is his ultimate aim in all this?"

Holmes lowered his voice.
-- "His object is... murder—cold, refined," he replied. "Do not ask me for details. I am entangling him in a web, just as he is entangling Sir Henry. There is only one thing I fear, and that is that he will execute his design before we are ready to strike. One more day, two at most, and I shall be in a position to confront this villain, but in the meantime, guard Sir Henry; I even regret that you left him today."

A terrible groan broke the silence. My blood froze in my veins.

-- "What is that?" I cried.

Holmes sprang to his feet, ran to the mouth of the cave, and strained his ears.

-- "Silence!" he whispered. "Silence!"

The same groan was repeated, closer now, tinged with fear and pain.

-- "Whence does that come?" Holmes whispered.

-- "It seems to me from over there," I replied, pointing to the left.

-- "No, no," he contradicted.

And again, a cry, full of despair and terror, tore the silence. It was now accompanied by a savage growl.

-- "It's the hound!" cried Holmes. "Run to his aid! Quickly! Quickly!"

He rushed forward, I after him. For the third time, a human groan and a terrible growling reached our ears. We stopped, listening. Silence fell again.

Holmes wrung his hands. Never before had I seen him so helpless.

-- "Too late, too late!..." he said in despair. "To think I sat here like a fool, with my hands folded! And you, how could you have let Sir Henry out of your protection!"

We ran on amidst the enveloping fog and ever-deepening darkness.

-- "Do you see nothing?" Holmes asked me.

-- "No," I replied.

-- "And what is that?" he suddenly cried.

A rasping sound was heard. It emanated from behind a bare rock, jutting out before us. We ran up, and a terrible sight met our gaze. At the foot of the rock, face to the ground, with outstretched arms, lay a man already dead. That rasping was his dying breath.

I struck a match – in its light, we saw something that made our blood run cold; the dead body of Sir Charles Baskerville.

We both knew the checked suit – the very same in which he had first appeared to us in Holmes's lodgings. The match went out, and with it, hope in our hearts.

-- "I'll never forgive myself for leaving him alone..." I whispered.

-- "I am even more to blame, Watson. For 'completing' and 'rounding off' the evidence, I risked my client's life. This is the greatest blow I have ever encountered in my profession! But how could we have foreseen that despite our pleas and warnings, he would venture alone onto that accursed moor?"

-- "And to think that we heard his cries and could not reach him in time. Where is that accursed hound? Any moment it might spring out from behind the rock. And where is Stapleton? We will hold him to account!"

-- "Yes, I shall not fail to do so," said Holmes. "Uncle and nephew have been murdered! Of that there is no doubt. One was frightened to death by the mere sight of that creature, which he took for a supernatural apparition; the other fell from the rock while fleeing this monster. But we must demonstrate the connection between the hound and its victim. How shall we prove the existence of this quadrupedal monster? Sir Henry apparently died as a result of the fall. But despite all his cunning, Stapleton will not slip through the grasp of the police!"

We stood over the corpse, helpless in the face of the catastrophe that had turned all our efforts to naught. At last the moon rose; we ascended to the top of the rock from which our unfortunate friend had fallen and surveyed the bleak expanse, now silvered by the gentle moonlight.

Far off, in the direction of Grimpen Mire, a yellow light gleamed. It undoubtedly burned in Stapleton's house. I clenched my fist in helpless rage.

-- "Let's arrest him at once!" I cried.

-- "We have no evidence yet," Holmes argued. "This wretch is cunning, he knows how to defend himself. It's not about what we know, but what we can prove. One false step, and he'll slip through our fingers."

-- "What remains for us now?"

-- "We will devise our plan tomorrow; today we must think of paying our last respects to our friend."

We descended from the rock and approached the corpse, now illuminated by the moon.

-- "We must bring men," I said. "The two of us cannot carry him to Baskerville Hall. What is it? Have you gone mad?"

Holmes, looking at the corpse, laughed, rubbing his hands. What had happened to my friend, usually so serious?

-- "A beard! A beard! This man had a beard!" he cried.

-- "A beard?" I echoed.

-- "That's not Sir Henry. It's my neighbour – the convict!"

With feverish alacrity, we turned the corpse's face to the moon. No doubt remained: a bloody forehead, sunken eyes, a reddish beard – yes, it was Seldon.

In an instant, I understood how matters stood. The baronet had told me that he had given his old clothing to Barrymore. Evidently, Barrymore, at his wife's urging, had given it to Seldon to facilitate his escape. The boots, the cap, the suit – all belonged to Sir Henry. A terrible fate had befallen the prisoner, but this man deserved punishment and would have received it at the hands of justice anyway. I explained to Holmes the reason for our mistake.

-- "This clothing is the cause of Seldon's death," he said. "Of course, the hound was trained to recognize Sir Henry by his scent. I understand now why the boot disappeared from the hotel; the hound picked up the scent of the clothes on the convict and chased him. Only one thing puzzles me: how could Seldon, in the darkness, have seen that the hound was pursuing him?"

-- "He heard the growling, just as we did."

-- "The mere growl of a dog would not have frightened him so much that he would cry for help, betraying his whereabouts and risking capture by the warders. I deduce from his cries that he must have run a considerable distance from where the hound first startled him."

-- "And I don't understand why this hound was let loose precisely today. I assume it's not always at large. If Stapleton unchained it, then he must have expected Sir Henry to be passing through the moor."

-- "What shall we do with this corpse now? It's impossible to leave him here to the prey of scavengers."

-- "It's best to place him in one of the caves until we inform the police."

-- "You are right," Holmes admitted. "Surely the two of us can manage him? But look... Watson... it's *he*! What impudence! Not a word to him about our suspicions... not a word! Otherwise, all my plans will come to naught."

I saw the light of a cigar. In the moonlight, I clearly saw the naturalist's small figure. Noticing us, he stopped, but after a moment, he walked on.

-- "Whom do I see!" he said. "If my eyes do not deceive me, Dr. Watson. I did not expect to meet you here. What is this? Someone has been injured... No, it's impossible... Our friend, Sir Henry!"

He ran up and bent over the corpse. I heard his breath quicken, his cigar dropped from his fingers.

-- "Who is it? Who is this?" he whispered.

-- "It is Seldon, the convict who escaped from Princetown."

Stapleton paled dreadfully, but with a superhuman effort, he mastered his feeling of bitter disappointment. His gaze shifted from Holmes to me and back again.

-- "What a terrible business!" he said. "How did he die?"

-- "He broke his neck, falling from this rock. I was just walking with my friend when a terrible cry reached us."

-- "And I heard that cry too. That's what brings me here. I was uneasy about Sir Henry..."

-- "Why Sir Henry in particular?" I asked.

-- "Because he was due to come to my place. Since he was late, I went out to meet him, and then I heard the cry... But, truly..." – and again he shifted his gaze from my face to Holmes's face – "did you gentlemen hear anything more besides that cry?"

-- "No, and you?" Holmes asked.

-- "Nor I."

-- "Then what does that question mean?"

-- "I was thinking of the legends current among the villagers. Supposedly, barking is heard at night. I was curious whether similar sounds were audible now."

-- "We heard nothing," I replied.

-- "And how do you gentlemen explain the death of this scoundrel?"

-- "I presume," I said, "that something frightened him; he ran, blindly, until his foot slipped and he fell headfirst from this rock. He died instantly, for the rock is high, and on this side it plunges perpendicularly into the dell; its other side joins the plateau. Running, the prisoner in his terror did not perceive that he stood over a precipice."

-- "That is very probable," admitted Stapleton, and he sighed with evident relief, as if a weight had been lifted from his heart. "And what do you think of it, Mr. Holmes?"

-- "I presume the same as my friend."

-- "We have been expecting you since Dr. Watson arrived here. You appear at a tragic moment..."

-- "I hope that my friend's explanation will be accepted as the only plausible one. At any rate, when I return to London tomorrow, I shall carry with me an unpleasant memory of this place."

-- "So you are returning tomorrow?"

-- "That is my intention."

-- "I expect that your investigations will shed light on the mysterious affair that has occupied us for some months."

-- "And I doubt it," replied Holmes with perfectly feigned candour. "A detective, in his deductions, usually relies on facts, not on popular lore. This is a difficult and intricate matter. I do not expect to unravel it."

Stapleton looked at him sharply, then turned to me:

-- "I'd gladly offer to have this poor fellow moved to my house, but I fear frightening my sister. It is best to cover Seldon's face, and the corpse will be safe until morning."

So we did. Stapleton offered us hospitality, but we declined, and both made our way to Baskerville Hall. The naturalist went back alone.

-- "We have him now, almost," Holmes said. "And what composure! What sang-froid! How daringly he gazed at the corpse of him whom he considered his victim. I told you in London, and I repeat it now, that I have never faced such a formidable opponent."

-- "I regret that he saw us."

-- "And I regretted it at first; but there was no other way."

-- "Do you think the knowledge of your presence here will affect his plans?"

-- "It will force him to caution, or perhaps drive him to a final desperate act. Like many clever criminals, he is doubtless too sure of his own cleverness and imagines he can outwit us."

-- "And why do we not arrest him at once?"

-- "My dear Watson, you are a man of action. Your first impulse is always to act. But supposing we arrest him tonight, what good would that do us? We could prove nothing against him. If a man were helping him, we might find evidence; but even if we found the hound, it would not help us to tighten the noose around its master's neck."

-- "But we have evidence."

-- "Not a single one – merely surmises and inferences. The court would scoff at us if we appeared before it with such a body of evidence."

-- "Surely we can cite Sir Charles's death..."

-- "He was found dead with no marks of violence, no wounds or injuries. We both know he died of fright, and we also know who frightened him, but how are we to impress that belief upon twelve jurors? What marks did the hound leave on the body? Naturally, we know that no hound will touch a dead body; we further know that Sir Charles breathed his last before the wild creature reached him. We know it, but we must *prove* it—and that we cannot do."

-- "Is not the fact that occurred today an important piece of circumstantial evidence?"

-- "We cannot demonstrate the connection between the hound and the death of this man. Besides, we did not see the hound; we only heard it, and we cannot prove it was pursuing Seldon or anyone else. No, my dear, we must reconcile ourselves to waiting and acting from concealment."

-- "What are your plans?"

-- "I expect much from Mrs. Lyons, and I hope that tomorrow we shall obtain at least one piece of evidence."

I could not persuade him to express his intentions more clearly. He walked in silence all the way to the very Hall itself.

-- "Will you enter?" I asked.

-- "Of course; further discretion is needless. Listen, Watson: do not mention the hound to Sir Henry. Was not the baronet invited to dinner with the Stapletons tomorrow?"

-- "They invited me too."

-- "You must make your excuses. He will go by himself. That can be easily arranged. And now, let's go. You have certainly missed dinner, but we are just in time for supper."

***

### XIII. Setting the Net.

Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised by Holmes's appearance; he had indeed expected that recent events would prompt him to come. He could not, however, understand why my friend had brought no luggage with him. We supplied him with everything he needed, and then, over a hearty supper, we recounted our adventure to the baronet, omitting certain details.

But first, an unwelcome duty awaited me: informing the Barrymores of Seldon's death. For the husband, it was in a way good news, but the wife wept uncontrollably at the news. In everyone's eyes, that criminal was a monster and an outcast of society; she always saw in him a boy with fair hair, whom she had carried in her arms and loved as her own child.

There is no man so bad that a woman would not weep for him...

-- "After Watson left," said the baronet, "I prowled from corner to corner, faithful to my promise: not to venture alone upon the moor after sundown. Now, however, I regret that I did not accept Stapleton's invitation, who wrote to me towards evening. If I had gone, I would have spent a more cheerful evening."

-- "Indeed, I have no doubt," said Holmes. "But it is true, I forgot to tell you that we had already mourned him for dead. We were convinced it was you."

Sir Henry looked at him with surprise.

-- "That poor fellow was dressed from head to foot in your clothing. I fear that Barrymore, who supplied him with it, will have a run-in with the police..."

-- "I doubt it. There were no marks of identification."

-- "That is fortunate for him, and indeed for us, for you are not entirely without blame in the matter either. You could be held accountable for knowing the escaped convict's hiding place and for not notifying the police of it. As a conscientious detective, I should even arrest you and the entire household staff..."

-- "Before you discharge that duty," said the baronet facetiously, "perhaps I may learn how our case stands? Have you untangled its intricacies? We, Watson and I, know no more now than we did at the start."

-- "I hope I shall be able to elucidate the mystery. The matter is indeed very complicated, with many dark points within it, but I expect to shed light on them."

-- "Here, Watson and I have only established one fact: the barking of the hound on the moor. We heard it clearly, so it is no legend nor superstition. If you could capture that hound, you would be the greatest detective in the world."

-- "I hope to capture it and muzzle it, but I require your assistance."

-- "Dispose of me as you wish. I will do whatever you please."

-- "Then I will ask you to obey me blindly."

-- "Indeed."

-- "If you adhere to my directions and commands, without questioning their purpose, I may yet succeed in unravelling the mystery. I have no doubt..."

He broke off suddenly and gazed at a point above my head. Light fell on his face, impassive, as if chiselled from stone.

-- "What do you see there?" cried Sir Henry.

Looking at Sherlock, I perceived that he was suppressing an inner agitation. His features were impassive, as always, but a strange fire burned in his eyes.

-- "That was the delight of the expert eye," he said after a moment, pointing to a row of portraits hanging on the opposite wall. "Watson, who grudges my connoisseurship, will tell you that our views on art are at odds. In my opinion, this gallery of portraits is magnificent."

-- "I am glad to hear it," replied Sir Henry, looking at my friend with surprise. "I know nothing of painting: I prefer a handsome horse to a valuable picture. I did not think you had time to indulge in such pursuits..."

-- "I cannot be indifferent to masterpieces when I have them before my eyes," Holmes replied. "I could venture to say that this lady in the blue satin dress and that venerable gentleman in the wig came from the brush of Reynolds. Are these not all family portraits?"

-- "Yes, all of them."

-- "Do you know the names and dates?"

-- "Barrymore tried to initiate me into the family history, and I believe I recall his discourse."

-- "Who is that gentleman with the telescope in his hand?"

-- "That is Admiral Baskerville; he served in the West Indies under Rodney. And this one in the blue frock coat is Sir William Baskerville, who was Speaker of the House of Commons in Pitt's time."

-- "And that rider, opposite me, in the velvet riding-coat?"

-- "Oh! that one is worth a few words. He is the cause of our family's misfortunes. That is indeed Bloody Hugh, who unleashed a pack of hounds upon that unhappy maiden..."

I looked at the portrait with great interest.

-- "I should never have guessed it was he," said Holmes. "A placid, tranquil face, only in the eyes... a flicker of flame. I had pictured him more robust and formidable."

-- "There is no doubt that it is he. On the reverse side of the canvas is the name and date – the year 1647."

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English:

My friend fell silent, but he did not take his eyes off the portrait. It was only after we had retired for the night that I learned why this canvas aroused such keen interest in him.

He led me back to the dining-room with a candle in his hand and brought it closer to the portrait.

"What strikes you?" he asked.

My gaze swept over the large feathered hat, the golden curls, and the lace collar; I gazed at the cold, severe features. There was no passion in them, but an unyielding, cruel will; it flashed from steel-grey eyes, betrayed by narrow, compressed lips.

"Does this portrait remind you of anyone you know?" Holmes asked.

"The lower part of the face is somewhat like Sir Henry's."

"Indeed. But wait."

He jumped onto a chair, and holding the candle in his left hand, with his right he obscured the broad hat and hair.

"Good Heavens!" I exclaimed.

From the frame of the painting emerged Stapleton's face…

"Ha! You noticed at last!" Holmes said. "My eyes are accustomed to examining faces themselves, without the accoutrements of dress. The first quality of a detective is to recognize people even in disguise."

"But this is extraordinary!" I said, unable to recover from my astonishment. "This painting could be his very portrait!"

"Yes, it is physical proof of atavism and moral resemblance. Studies of family portraits can fill us with a belief in the transmigration of souls. This man is of the Baskerville line, there is no doubt about it."

"And that is why he is scheming for the succession…"

"Naturally. The portrait has filled a gap in my investigations. We have him, Watson! I am ready to wager that tomorrow he will fall into my nets, just like the butterflies he himself chases. I shall pin him down and add him to my collection of criminals."

He burst out laughing, which rarely happened to him.

The next day I rose very early, but Holmes had already preceded me. He was dressed to go out.

"We have the whole day free," he said, rubbing his hands with satisfaction. "The nets are already set; only the butterfly is missing."

"Have you already been out?"

"I've sent word to Princetown about Seldon's death. I trust none of you will be troubled about this matter. I've also communicated with faithful Cartwright; he hovered around my lair like a dog over his master's grave. I had to reassure him that I was safe and sound."

"What next?"

"We will greet Sir Henry. Ha! Here he is!"

"Good morning, Holmes," said the baronet, entering the dining-room. "You look like a commander consulting with his chief of staff before a battle."

"For so it is. Watson is receiving orders."

"And I am ready to listen to them."

"Stapleton invited you to dinner today, did he not?"

"I expect you gentlemen will come with me. They are very hospitable, and I can vouch that they will receive you with open arms."

"Watson and I both must go to London."

"To London?"

"Yes; our presence is more needed there than here."

"I had hoped," declared the baronet, "that you would not leave me until this matter was cleared up. What shall I do here alone in this wilderness?"

"My dear sir, you must trust me implicitly and do as I say. You will tell the Stapletons that we had a great desire to accompany you, but that important business has called us to London. We expect to return shortly. Will you be so good as to repeat this to them word for word?"

"If it matters to you."

I saw that the baronet was displeased by our departure and that he held it against us that we were abandoning him.

"When do you intend to leave?" he asked coldly.

"Immediately after first breakfast. We will stop at Coombe-Tracey. Watson is leaving his valise here, as proof that he will return shortly. Write a few words to Stapleton, apologizing that you cannot accept his invitation."

"I feel like going with you," said the baronet. "What keeps me here?"

"You gave me your word that you would follow my instructions, and I tell you to stay."

"Ah! In that case, I shall stay."

"One more thing. You will go to Merripit House by American trap. You will send the horses back at once and state that you intend to return on foot."

"Am I to go across the moor?"

"Yes."

"But that contradicts your previous advice! You both warned me not to go out onto the moor or meadow after sunset."

"This time you can go safely. If I did not trust your courage and presence of mind, I would not give you such advice. Believe me, it is essential."

"Very well then."

"But if you value your life, do not stray from the path; you must go straight along the track leading from Merripit House to Grimpen Road."

"Good, I'll remember."

"I wish to leave here immediately after breakfast so as to arrive in London before evening."

I was surprised by such a program; although Holmes had mentioned to Stapleton the previous day that he was going to town the next morning, I had not thought he would take me with him, and I could not understand why, at the most crucial moment, he was abandoning his post. I remained silent, however, knowing that one must obey him passively.

We bade farewell to our friend, and a few hours later we were at Coombe-Tracey station. The horses had been sent home. A small boy stood on the platform.

"What are your orders?" he asked Holmes.

"You will go by this train to London. Immediately upon arrival, you will telegraph Sir Henry Baskerville in my name, asking him to have a cigarette case, which I left at his place, searched for and sent to Baker Street."

"Very well, sir."

"Ask at the station if there isn't a letter for me."

The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmes handed to me. I read the following:

"Despatch received. Arriving with unsigned warrant. Will be there at 5:40. Lestrade."

"That is the reply to my telegram, sent this morning. We shall need his help. A shrewd and courageous man. And now, Watson, I think nothing remains for us but to visit your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons."

I began to grasp the plan of campaign. Holmes, through the baronet's agency, wanted to convince the Stapletons that we had indeed departed, while we, meanwhile, would appear at the moment of impending danger.

That telegram from London, which Sir Henry would doubtless mention, would dispel the naturalist's suspicions.

The nets were already set.

Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office. Sherlock Holmes went straight to the point with a frankness that disconcerted her.

"I am investigating the circumstances surrounding the death of Sir Charles Baskerville," he declared. "My friend, Dr. Watson, informed me of the content of his conversation with you; I also know what you omitted…"

"What did I omit?"

"You admitted that Sir Charles was to be at the gate at ten o'clock at your request — we know that death met him at that hour. You did not explain what relation exists between these two facts."

"They are in no relation to each other."

"That would be a strange coincidence. I believe, however, that we shall be able to prove a connection between one fact and the other. I wish to be entirely frank with you. We consider this 'accident' a murder; not only your friend, Mr. Stapleton, is suspected, but also his wife…"

Mrs. Lyons sprang to her feet.

"His wife?…" she cried.

"Yes. The truth has come out. The person who hitherto passed for his sister is actually his wife…"

Mrs. Lyons sat down again, her fingers gripping the armrest of the armchair with such force that her knuckles turned white.

"His wife!" she whispered. "His wife! So he is married!…"

Sherlock Holmes spread his hands, as if to say there was nothing to be done.

"I want proof. If you can confirm these statements with facts…" She did not finish, her voice died in her throat.

"I came armed with proofs, knowing that you would demand them," Holmes declared, taking a packet of papers from his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the married couple, taken some years ago in York. They are registered in the photographer's books as 'Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but it is easy to recognize both her and him. Further—three descriptions of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur; the husband at that time was the headmaster of a private school in St. Oliver. The descriptions were sent by reliable persons. Read them, madam, and you will see if they correspond to the appearance of Mr. Stapleton and his supposed sister."

She scanned the letters and sank into silence. She seemed rigid with pain.

"Mr. Holmes," she said at last, "that man promised to marry me if I obtained a divorce. He lied to me, he betrayed me. I imagined he was acting for me – now I see that I was merely a tool in his hand. I don't need to keep his secret, since he didn't keep faith with me!… I have no intention of shielding him from the consequences of his wicked deeds. Ask me what you will – I will conceal nothing. I swear to you that when I wrote that letter, I did not know I was endangering Sir Charles, who was kinder to me than my own father."

"I believe you implicitly," Sherlock Holmes replied. "The telling would be very painful for you, so perhaps it is better that I tell how things were, and you can correct any inaccuracies or errors. Stapleton advised you to write that letter, did he not?"

"He dictated it to me."

"I presume he persuaded you by proving that Sir Charles would gladly bear the expenses of the divorce."

"Precisely."

"And when you sent the letter, he advised you not to come to the appointed place."

"He said that his pride would not allow a stranger to bear such expenses, and that although he himself was not well-off, he would spend his last penny to remove the obstacles blocking our path to happiness."

"And then you read the news of his death in the local newspaper?"

"Yes."

"Then he made you swear that you would not mention your letter to Sir Charles to anyone?"

"He said that the death was mysterious and that they might suspect me of murder. He frightened me with such an argument and forced me to silence."

"And did you have any doubts?"

She was silent for a long time, then at last she said:

"Perhaps, because I know him. But if he had kept faith with me, I would never have betrayed him."

"At any rate, you have emerged from this matter unscathed," Holmes impressed upon her. "You had him in your power, and yet you live. And now we will bid you farewell. Goodbye for now!"

*****

"Our case is beginning to round out," Holmes said, a few minutes later, as we stood on the station platform awaiting the London train. "It is the strangest crime that has occurred in our century. Students of criminology will recall a similar case in 1866 in Grodno, and another in North Carolina in 1878, but the present case has its unique features. And even now, after uncovering the details, I still do not know in what way Stapleton contributed to Sir Charles's death. I hope, however, that this will become clear before midnight."

The London express steamed onto the platform with a hiss and a whistle. A stocky man with a cheerful face sprang from a first-class carriage. He greeted Holmes with the respect of an officer saluting the commander-in-chief of an army.

"Is there anything new?" he asked.

"It seems that the present case will cause a stir," my friend replied, rubbing his hands. "We have two hours free. We must dine and gather strength for our work. After dinner, we'll take a walk across the moor; the fresh air will expel from your lungs the London fog accumulated within them. This is your first time here, isn't it? I hope you will not forget this visit…"

XIV.

The Hound of the Baskervilles.

One of Sherlock Holmes's flaws — if one can call it a flaw — is his reticence. He was not in the habit of revealing his plans to anyone until the last moment. This is a result of his despotic and independent nature, and a little bit of vanity besides. He liked to astonish and delight with his investigative genius. Moreover, this secrecy may also stem from caution, which does not allow him to express himself before anyone. At any rate, it is unpleasant for those around him.

This often annoyed me, but never to such an extent as that evening. A difficult and dangerous task awaited us, we were to act together, and yet Holmes did not assign us our roles. We spoke of extraneous subjects, having nothing to do with the matter at hand.

My friend hired a cab at the station and had himself driven to Baskerville Hall. We got out at the gate. He paid the cabman and sent him off to Coombe-Tracey, whereupon he told us to follow him in the direction of Merripit House.

"Do you have a weapon?" he asked Lestrade.

"I never part with my revolver," the detective replied. "By day it's stuck to the pocket of my trousers, and by night — to my pillow."

"That's good. My friend and I are armed and ready."

"What are your orders?"

"To wait."

"Ah! It's not pleasant work, especially in such surroundings. What a desolate place!…" Lestrade said, looking around.

"You see those lights in the distance? That is Merripit House, the object of our excursion. Now we must walk on tiptoe and speak in whispers."

Two hundred yards from the house, Sherlock told us to stop.

"We will wait here," he whispered. "These stones to the right provide excellent cover. You will lie in ambush behind them, Lestrade. You have been to this house, Watson, have you not? The layout of the house is known to you. Do you see the lighted window?"

"That's the kitchen."

"And that one, on the other side?"

"That's the dining-room."

"Please creep up to these windows and see what they are doing there, but for heaven's sake, be careful not to let them realize they are being watched."

I walked slowly, on tiptoe; bent double, I reached a place from where I could see the dining-room window.

Two men sat at a round table: Sir Henry and Stapleton.

They were turned to me in profile. Both were smoking cigars and drinking coffee. A bottle of wine stood before them. Stapleton was talking animatedly, the baronet was pale and distracted. Perhaps the thought of returning alone across that accursed moor troubled him.

After a moment, Stapleton rose and left the room. Sir Henry drank a draught of coffee and drew on his cigar. I heard the creak of a door and the crunch of gravel: someone was walking on the other side of the wall. I peered out cautiously and saw the naturalist. He walked slowly, as if sneaking, then stopped at the door of a side annex. A key grated in the lock, and after a moment I heard a strange sound, like a growl. Stapleton remained for a few minutes and then returned to the house. I saw him enter the room where he had left Sir Henry.

I returned to my companions to report to Holmes.

"So you say the lady is absent?" he asked, having listened to me to the end.

"She's not in the dining-room."

"All other rooms dark? Where could she be hiding?…"

White mists hung over the moor; the moon, shining brightly in the sky, could not dispel them. The whole area seemed sprinkled with snow.

"Accursed fog!" Holmes muttered. "It will soon engulf us, and then all will be lost. That alone could foil my plans. But I hope we won't wait much longer. It's ten o'clock. Sir Henry will come out any moment. This fog means his life…"

The night was clear; beyond the edge of the mists, Merripit House was visible. Only two windows were lighted. Suddenly the light went out in the kitchen; only that in the dining-room remained, where the murderer and his victim sat over their glasses and cigars. Meanwhile, the fog enveloped an ever wider area, already touching Stapleton's house. The wall at the other end of the garden disappeared into it, the tops of the trees still emerged from beyond the mists. Holmes paced back and forth. He was anxious.

"If he doesn't come out in a quarter of an hour, all our work will be for nothing. In half an hour, we won't be able to see our own hands…"

He knelt and put his ear to the ground.

"Thank God! I hear his footsteps…" he whispered.

A regular tread was heard. The footsteps grew louder and clearer, reaching us through the fog, as through a curtain, and suddenly he whom we awaited appeared.

He passed along the path beside us and proceeded onwards, looking right and left with visible anxiety as he went.

"Hist!" Holmes whispered. "Attention!"

The fog was already fifty yards ahead of us. We strained our eyes, sensing that something terrible would emerge from it. I looked at Holmes. He was pale, staring at one point, his lips twitching. At that moment Lestrade cried out and fell face down to the ground. I sprang up, not letting go of my pistol, though my blood froze in my veins at the sight of the terrible apparition that sprang from the fog…

It was an enormous dog, black as coal, but no ordinary dog. Its gaping maw breathed fire, sparks flew from its eyes, its entire muzzle seemed to be aflame. The most dreadful nightmare could not have been more terrifying than this infernal beast emerging towards us from the darkness.

The wild beast bounded after our friend in leaps…

We were so terrified by this phenomenon that we did not fire in time. The dog ran past us. Holmes and I fired simultaneously; the animal, evidently hit, groaned terribly, but did not stop in its mad pursuit.

Sir Henry, who was already far off, looked back; I saw in the moonlight that he stopped, terrified, and raised his hands.

The dog's groan dispelled our superstitious fears. If the bullet wounded the animal, then it was not a phantom but a reality — we could kill it.

In my life, I had never seen anyone run so fast as Holmes that night. I ran after him, but he outran me. We heard the dog's growling and Sir Henry's cries for help ahead of us. I arrived at the moment when the enraged animal lunged at its victim, knocked him to the ground, and bared its teeth. With a wild howl and a moan of pain, the dying dog collapsed on the baronet.

I sprang forward and placed my pistol to the dog's head, but the shot was unnecessary. The four-legged persecutor of the Baskerville family was already dead.

We bent over Sir Henry. My friend breathed more freely, seeing that our help had arrived in time. Lestrade poured a few drops of brandy into the baronet's mouth. Sir Henry looked at us with terrified eyes.

"What is that?" he whispered. "What is that thing?…"

"We have killed the evil spirit of the Baskervilles. It will not live again!" Holmes cried.

At our feet lay a gigantic hound, the size of a young lioness; it was a cross between a pointer and a mastiff. Its extinguished eyes still gleamed, its bloody muzzle breathed fire.

I ran my hand over its shaggy head — my fingers gleamed in the darkness…

"Phosphorus!" I said.

"A devilish idea!" Holmes said, bending over the dead animal. "I most earnestly apologize, Sir Henry, for having to subject you to such terror. I suspected they would unleash the dog, but I didn't think they'd first smear it with phosphorus to make it seem like an infernal monster…"

"You saved my life!"

"By putting it in danger. Can you stand on your own?"

"Give me more brandy. Yes! And now support me for a moment, for my legs are still trembling. What are your orders now?"

"First and foremost, you must rest. If you wait here for us, we will escort you home."

Sir Henry was still pale and could not stand on his feet. We seated him on a stone.

"And now to work," Holmes said. "Every moment is precious. We already have proof of the crime; it remains to capture the criminal."

We left Sir Henry and proceeded towards Stapleton's house.

"He heard the shots and guessed that his 'trick' had been revealed. We won't find him there anymore," Holmes said.

"Who knows? The thick fog probably muffled the sound of the revolver, and besides, the distance is quite considerable; he might not have heard."

"You think he waited for the result in the house? Then you don't know him. I'll bet he went out after the dog to recall it after its 'work' was done. I would wager he is not in Merripit House. Anyway, we'll search the house from attic to cellar."

The front door was open; we entered, to the surprise of the old servant who stood in the hall. Except for the dining-room, darkness reigned everywhere, but Holmes took a lamp from the table and went with it from room to room. Stapleton was nowhere to be found.

Here is the translation of the provided text from Polish into English:

One of the rooms upstairs was locked.

"There's someone in there!" Lestrade cried. "I hear breathing. Open the door!"

A groan answered us. Holmes struck the doorknob with his fist; it sprang open, and the door swung wide. We rushed into the room, pistols in hand.

Stapleton was not there. A strange and unexpected sight presented itself to our eyes.

The room was a kind of museum; rare butterfly specimens were pinned in display cases and on the walls. In the middle of the room stood a pillar, likely placed there to support an old beam that threatened to collapse. To this pillar, a human figure was bound; at first glance, we could not tell whether it was a man or a woman. One towel was wrapped around her throat, securing her to the pillar, while another covered the lower part of her face. The entire figure was enveloped in a sheet.

In the blink of an eye, we tore away her bonds; Mrs. Stapleton lay on the floor at our feet. Her throat was bruised and there were nail marks on her face and body.

"The wretch!..." Holmes exclaimed with indignation. "Lestrade, hand me that bottle of spirits," he said. "We must get her into a chair and rub her limbs."

Her eyes opened.

"What has become of him?" she whispered. "Has he escaped?"

"He won't escape so easily."

"I speak not of *him*, but of Sir Henry. Is he safe?"

"Yes."

"And the hound?"

"It is dead."

She breathed more easily.

"Thank God! Gentlemen, you see how that villain has treated me!..."

She drew her hands from her sleeves – they were covered in bruises.

"But that is the least of it," she continued. "He has trampled on my soul, humiliated me... I endured everything: loneliness, hardship, as long as I could believe in his love; but even there, I met with disappointment..."

She burst into tears.

"You have no reason to spare him, madam," Holmes said. "Tell us, where is he hiding? If you have aided him in his evil, help us now to set things right."

"There is only one place where he could hide: an old lead mine, in the very heart of the moor. That is where he kept the hound; I know he made preparations to hide there himself."

Holmes brought the lamp closer to the window.

"Look," he said, "what a fog! No one will be able to reach Grimpen Mire today."

She clapped her hands. Her eyes sparkled.

"He will reach it, but he will not be able to get out, for in this fog he will not see the branches we stuck in together to mark the path to Grimpen Mire. It's a pity I couldn't pull them out today, for then he would have been at your mercy..."

Further pursuit was impossible until the fog lifted. Meanwhile, we left Lestrade at Merripit House, while Sir Henry and I returned to Baskerville Hall.

It was no longer possible to conceal the Stapletons' story from him. He calmly received the news that the woman he had loved was the villain's wife, not his sister. But the emotions of that night had shaken his nerves. He developed a fever. We sent for Doctor Mortimer.

When the baronet recovered from his illness, to regain his mental balance, he embarked on a voyage around the world under the care of that estimable physician. He returned healthy in mind and body.

* * * * *

I am approaching the end of this strange tale; I have endeavoured to convey to the reader the anxieties that plagued us for so long and concluded so tragically.

The day after the events described, the fog lifted, and guided by Mrs. Stapleton, we managed to reach the point from which the path led onto the moor.

The unfortunate woman, with an eagerness that bespoke her deep resentment towards the man who had ruined her life and trampled upon her womanly dignity, endeavoured to put us on his trail.

From that point, a line of branches stuck into the mire indicated hummocks of solid ground, over which one could pass dry-shod. A single false step could have cost us our lives. Only once did we see a trace that someone had passed along that dangerous path. Among the weeds and grass, a black object protruded.

Holmes stooped to pick it up, whereupon his foot slipped; had we not supported him, he would have plunged into the bottomless bog. He rose, holding an old boot in his hand. Inside, on the sole, the name "Meyers, Toronto" was inscribed.

"A mud bath well worth taking!" he exclaimed. "This is Sir Henry's missing boot."

"Stapleton doubtless threw it here during his flight."

"Undoubtedly. By holding this boot, he was setting the hound on Sir Henry's trail... The sound of the gunshot signalled to Stapleton that his ambush had failed. The villain fled with this boot in hand. It was here that he cast it aside. Thus, he reached this spot safely."

We were to learn still other details, though many things remained unexplained. It was impossible to find tracks on the bog, for the mire immediately engulfed them. Having passed the deepest parts of the moor, we searched for footprints on firmer ground. In vain. If the earth's testimony was credible, Stapleton never reached the island towards which he was heading in the fog.

Grimpen Mire had swallowed the wretch whole. His bones doubtless rest among its impenetrable quicksands...

Conversely, we found many traces of him on the island where he had concealed the hound. In one of the abandoned huts, a chain was fastened to the wall; gnawed bones indicated that the dog had been imprisoned there. Nearby lay the skeleton of a small terrier.

"Look! Why, that's Mortimer's favourite!" Holmes exclaimed. "Stapleton could hide the hound, but he could not suppress its baying. He could, it is true, have kept it in the outbuilding of Merripit House, but that would have been too risky. He decided on this course of action on the last day, when he staked everything on a single throw. The ointment in this tin was doubtless a mixture of sulphur and phosphorus, with which the hound was smeared. In this manner, exploiting the legend, that villain frightened Sir Charles to death. Small wonder Seldon fled screaming. Indeed, our friend Sir Henry, and we ourselves, could not refrain from exclaiming at such a sight. It was a diabolical scheme! – intended not only to terrify the victim, but also to hinder investigation, for a hound breathing fire filled the local peasants with superstitious dread and deterred them from pursuing such a monster. I told you this once before in London, Watson, and I repeat now, Stapleton was the most dangerous villain I have ever encountered in my life."

XV.
A Retrospective.

Late in November, on a dark and rainy evening, Holmes and I sat by the fire in our sitting-room on Baker Street. My friend was in excellent spirits, and I took the opportunity to question him about the details of the Baskerville case hitherto unknown to me.

Sir Henry and Doctor Mortimer were in London, preparing for a long journey intended to strengthen the baronet's nerves.

"The whole affair was clear and simple from the perspective of the supposed Stapleton," Holmes said, in response to my question. "To us, however, who knew nothing of his motives and aims, it seemed mysterious and convoluted. You will find my views under the letter 'B' in my criminal records."

"I would prefer that you tell me in your own words."

"Very well, but I cannot vouch for its absolute accuracy. My memory may deceive me. My investigations revealed that the family portrait did not mislead us. This villain was the son of Roger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother; he emigrated to America with a very bad reputation. There he married Beryl Garcia, the most beautiful woman in Costa Rica, and after embezzling a significant sum from public funds, he changed his name to Vandeleur, fled to England, and established a boys' school in Yorkshire. His choice of this profession was prompted by an acquaintance he made on his return journey with a consumptive teacher named Fraser. They entered into a partnership. As long as Fraser lived, the school prospered and was conducted with a sense of civic duty, but after his death, it acquired the worst possible reputation, and finally was covered in shame. Vandeleur deemed it advisable to change his name. As Stapleton, with the remnants of his stolen money and his fine entomological collections, he moved to Southern England.

The British Museum informed me that he was an authority in the field of entomology; he discovered many species that bear the name Vandeleur.

This scoundrel doubtless investigated his family connections and learned that only one human life stood between him and a vast fortune. I presume that at the time of settling in Devonshire, he did not yet have a clearly defined plan; however, the fact that he presented his wife as his sister from the outset indicates his evil intentions. Evidently, he already had a project to use her as an instrument, though he did not yet know by what means he would achieve his goal.

First and foremost, he endeavoured to settle as close as possible to the seat of his ancestors; secondly, to establish a friendly relationship with Sir Charles Baskerville and his neighbours.

The baronet himself told him about the hound that plagued their family, and thereby brought about his own dreadful death. Stapleton — for so I shall continue to call him — knew that Sir Charles had a heart condition and that a violent shock could kill him; he also knew that he was superstitious and believed in this legend.

The scoundrel immediately realised what advantage he could gain from this; he devised a certain death for the baronet, for which no one could be held accountable.

He executed his plan very cleverly. An ordinary villain would have used a rabid dog — he, however, gave it the appearance of an infernal beast. He purchased the wildest and largest hound he could procure from the dealers Ross and Mangles in London. He brought it to North Devon station, distant from Baskerville Hall, and traversed a considerable stretch of ground, walking through fields and across the moor, so that no one might observe him. First, he found a hiding place for it in Grimpen Mire and immediately brought it there. He kept it chained and awaited an opportunity. But it was not easy to find one.

The old baronet never left the confines of the hall after sunset. Several times Stapleton lay in wait for him with the hound, but in vain. It was then that the local peasants saw the enormous hound, which led to the rekindling of the legend.

Stapleton hoped that his wife would be able to lead Sir Charles to his doom, but he met with unexpected resistance. She refused to ensnare the old gentleman with her charms; neither threats nor even physical blows could induce her to such a vile complicity. Stapleton had to act alone.

Sir Charles's philanthropy aided him. The estimable old gentleman, deceived by appearances, took a liking to Stapleton and, through his intermediation, performed many good deeds, among others for Mrs. Laura Lyons. Stapleton met her by chance, feigned interest in her plight, and aroused sympathy for her in the baronet's compassionate heart; and as he was skilled at winning the favour of women and presented himself as a bachelor, he soon gained not only the beautiful Laura's trust but also her heart; he also gave her to understand that he would marry her if she divorced her husband.

Upon hearing that Sir Charles, by Doctor Mortimer's advice, intended to leave Baskerville Hall, he resolved to act immediately, fearing lest his victim slip from his grasp. He thus persuaded Mrs. Lyons to write a letter, in which she implored the baronet to come to the garden gate on the eve of his departure for London. He then dissuaded her from appearing at the appointed place.

Returning that evening from Coombe Tracey, he unchained the hound, smeared it with phosphorus, and brought it to the gate, knowing that the old gentleman would appear there from the direction of the hall.

The hound, incited by its master, sprang over the gate and pursued the poor baronet; the latter fled down the avenue, crying out for help. The hound ran across the lawn, the baronet along the gravel path; for this reason, only traces of his footsteps remained.

Seeing him lie motionless, the hound doubtless approached, sniffed at him, and when it sensed he was dead, it turned back. Stapleton called it, led it to the improvised kennel in Grimpen Mire, and chained it up again.

Sir Charles's death remained unexplained; the police authorities racked their brains over its cause, the neighbourhood was in terror, and finally the matter was entrusted to our hands.

You understand the diabolical cunning of this villain; he arranged matters so that no traces of the crime could be found, nor a case brought against the murderer. His only accomplice could not betray him. Both women involved in the affair: Mrs. Stapleton and Mrs. Laura Lyons, had certain suspicions; Mrs. Stapleton even knew of her husband's evil intentions towards Sir Charles, as well as the existence of the hound. Mrs. Lyons, it is true, had no notion of either, but it struck her that the old gentleman's death occurred at the hour appointed for their meeting. Both women, however, were under the villain's influence – he had no reason to fear betrayal from them.

The first part of the fiendish task was accomplished; the second, more difficult, remained.

Stapleton might, for the time being, have been unaware of the heir's existence in Canada. Be that as it may, he learned of it soon after Sir Charles's death from his friend, Doctor Mortimer, who also informed him of Sir Henry's arrival.

Stapleton's first thought was likely to eliminate him in London. He had lost trust in his wife from the moment she refused to assist him in setting traps for Sir Charles. He feared, however, leaving her alone for too long, which is why he took her with him to London.

I ascertained that they resided at the Mexborough Hotel, off Craven Street. Stapleton locked his wife in, and himself, having affixed a beard for disguise, shadowed Doctor Mortimer's every move, following him to Baker Street, and then to the station and the Northumberland Hotel.

His wife suspected his plans, but feared warning the intended victim. If the letter had fallen into Stapleton's hands, her own life would have been in jeopardy.

As we know, she hit upon the idea of cutting words from a newspaper to warn the baronet. The letter reached the baronet's hands and was the first intimation of danger.

Stapleton endeavoured to obtain Sir Henry's boot, so that, if occasion arose, he might use the hound's scent to put it on the victim's trail.

The hotel servant provided him with the footwear, doubtless for a generous fee; but the first boot stolen was new; Stapleton had it discarded and procured a second, worn one. This minor fact immediately led me to surmise that Sir Henry's persecutor intended to use a hound for his purposes.

The following day, the baronet arrived here; Stapleton shadowed him in a hansom cab. Judging from the fact that he knew me and where I resided, I am prepared to assume that he had already had cause to fear my investigative activities and that he was no novice in the field of crime.

Over the past three years, four country houses in Devonshire had been robbed. In none of these cases had the culprits been apprehended. Finally, in May of the current year, Folkstone Court was plundered, and a servant, who was the first to discern the masked thief, was killed.

I could vouch that it was Stapleton, who in this manner replenished his funds. We had proof of his audacity in that he gave my name to the cabman. He then understood that I was shadowing him and that he would not be able to carry out his designs in London. He returned to Devonshire and awaited the baronet's arrival there.

"Pardon me," I said. "Could you explain who fed the hound during Stapleton's stay in London?"

"That is an important question," he replied. "I pondered it and came to the conclusion that Stapleton had an accomplice. At Merripit House, there was an old butler, Anthony. I know he had been in his service for at least several years, for he was seen during the time Stapleton was headmaster of the school in Yorkshire. This man must have known that Beryl was his master's wife, not his sister. After the attempt on Sir Henry, Anthony vanished without a trace.

Now, this name, rare in England, is very common in Spain and Spanish America. That servant, like Mrs. Stapleton, spoke English fluently, but with a soft, Southern accent. I myself saw Anthony walking towards Grimpen Mire by the path Stapleton had marked out. Doubtless he, during Stapleton's absence, fed the hound, though he likely did not know its ultimate purpose.

Now, a word about my activities during your stay with Sir Henry at Baskerville Hall. You may recall how, when examining the paper to which the words cut from _The Times_ were affixed, I was studying the watermark; I held the paper close to my eyes then. Indeed, a subtle scent of white jasmine drifted to me.

There are seventy-five types of perfumes that every detective should be able to distinguish; many cases depend upon the swift recognition of scents. The jasmine led me to surmise that the letter had been sent by a woman. Even then, my suspicions had turned towards the Stapletons.

Thus, I knew of the hound's existence and the murderer's dwelling place before you set out for Devonshire.

I resolved to shadow Stapleton. Naturally, I could not have done so while accompanying you, for the villain would have been on his guard. I deceived everyone, including yourself, and appeared secretly, at a time when you all believed I was in London.

I mostly concealed myself in Coombe Tracey, sheltering in a cave on the moor only when my presence in the field of action was essential. Cartwright, disguised as a country boy, rendered me considerable service. He supplied me with food and clean linen. While I shadowed Stapleton, he shadowed you, so that I was apprised of your every move.

I have already told you that your reports reached me swiftly, being immediately forwarded from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey. They proved most useful to me, especially Stapleton's biography. It helped me to uncover his true identity and his relationship with his beautiful companion.

The matter became complicated by the escape of the convict Seldon and his understanding with the Barrymores. You untangled even that intricacy, though I, too, arrived at the same conclusion by virtue of my own observations.

At the moment you found me on the moor, I already held all the threads of the conspiracy, but I possessed no concrete evidence with which I could stand before a court.

Even the attempt on Sir Henry, which concluded with the death of Seldon, the unfortunate convict, could not help us to demonstrate Stapleton's criminality.

There was no other recourse but to apprehend him in flagrante delicto, and for that purpose, I had to employ Sir Henry, at the risk of his nerves. I confess that the fault was mine in this: the case should have been handled differently, and our client spared this unpleasantness, but I could not foresee that this villain would smear the hound with sulphur and that there would be a fog that night, owing to which Sir Henry could not see from afar Stapleton's four-legged accomplice, who sprang out unexpectedly and startled that brave man. In any case, Doctor Mortimer and the specialists we summoned assure me that our friend will soon return to his equilibrium and regain his peace of mind, which was shaken not only by this incident but also by a heartbreak.

It only remains for me to elucidate Mrs. Stapleton's role. Her husband exerted a diabolical influence over her; it is unknown whether she loved him more or feared him more. At any rate, she obeyed him slavishly, resisting him only when he attempted to force her into complicity in his crimes. She wished to warn Sir Henry, without endangering her husband; she attempted it several times, but in vain.

Stapleton was capable of jealousy: seeing the baronet pay court to his wife, though this was within his intentions, he could not, however, restrain himself from a violent outburst. Having collected himself, he pretended to favour the budding affection, inviting Sir Henry to Merripit House in the hope that sooner or later an opportunity would arise to draw him into a trap.

Suddenly, on the day appointed for the attack, his wife declared herself against him. News reached her ears of the sudden death of the escaped convict on the moor, and as she knew that the hound was kept chained there, she surmised what kind of death Stapleton was preparing for Sir Henry, all the more so when her husband brought the hound and locked it in the outbuilding.

That evening, before Sir Henry's arrival for dinner, a quarrel broke out between the spouses. Beryl called her husband a criminal; enraged, and wishing to wound her deeply, he declared to her that he loved another.

As a professional book translator, here is the English translation of the provided Polish text, maintaining the tone and style appropriate for a classic novel:

***

This brutal confession severed the last bonds that tied her to the wretch, and kindled in her heart hatred and a desire for vengeance.

He perceived this change, and fearing she might betray him, he bound her to a pillar and locked her in. He was confident that after the crime was committed, when the entire district would attribute Sir Henry’s death to the curse resting upon his family, he, Stapleton, by adroit falsehoods and flattery, would manage to regain his wife’s affection, induce her to silence, and make her accept the accomplished facts.

In this, he would have met with unquestionable disappointment. A woman in whose veins Spanish blood flows does not forget such an affront.

That is all I know about this interesting case. Only one thing remains to be explained: how Stapleton, having attained the succession, would have explained why he had lived so long near Baskerville Hall under an assumed name? How would he have claimed the inheritance without arousing suspicion?

Mrs. Stapleton testifies that her husband had several schemes in this regard: either to claim the succession from South America and there prove his identity and acquire the fortune without coming to England; or to furnish some associate with the necessary credentials and receive the inheritance through him; or to conduct the matter himself on the spot, but under a different outward guise, in such a disguise that no one could recognise him. Knowing him, I am certain he would have extricated himself from these difficulties.

And now, my dear, enough of this matter. It has cost us no small trouble. We deserve some amusement. Tonight they are performing “Les Huguenots.” I have taken a box. Have you ever heard the Reszkes? We will dress at once and before the performance, we will go to dinner at a first-class restaurant. Agreed?...

**The End.**

---

**FOOTNOTES**

[Footnote 1: *Mire* -- mud.]

---

**ERRATA**

[Correction A: =Correction.= On page 35, in lines 14 and 13 from the bottom, for: “Only one word: ‘moor’ was written in capital letters, in ink,” -- it should read: “Only one word: ‘moor’ was written in ink, the rest in capital letters.”]

[Correction B: =Correction.= On page 189, in the previous appendix, a typographical error crept in: instead of “the dead body of Sir *Charles* Baskerville,” -- it should read: “the dead body of Sir *Henry* Baskerville.”]

---

**NOTES ON THE ELECTRONIC EDITION**

Original orthography and punctuation have been preserved, even in cases where they deviate from contemporary standards. However, errors that appeared to be typographical mistakes have been corrected.

The novel was originally serialised; in two instances, a later issue contained a correction regarding a typographical error in an earlier issue. These corrections have not been incorporated into the main text of this version; however, their content has been preserved in the form of footnotes, with references added in the appropriate places within the text. These are footnotes marked with letters, in contrast to footnotes marked with numbers, which genuinely appeared as footnotes in the original text.

Italics in the original text version are indicated by underlining.

**INCONSISTENCIES IN THE TEXT (UNCORRECTED)**

During the editing of the electronic version, attention was also drawn to inconsistencies present in the original text. These inconsistencies have not been corrected. The following list indicates differences in the spelling of similar words or phrases; numbers in parentheses denote the number of occurrences of each form in the text.

- Oxford street (1);
  Oxford Street (1);
  Oxford-Street (1);

- Lafter-Hall (2, including one corrected from “Lofter-Hall”);
  Lafterhall (1)

- farmerem (1);
  farmerów (1);
  farmy (1);
  fermerów (1);
  fermerzy (1);
  fermę (1);
  fermy (3)

- 4 Maja (1);
  4 maja (1)

- Baskerville'a (1);
  Baskervilla (3)

- Baskerville-Hall (23);
  Baskerville Hall (10)

- “Watson observed.” – should be “I observed”; in the original at this point there is no reference to who is speaking.

**CORRECTIONS INTRODUCED INTO THE TEXT**

- Title page
  “Canon'a Doyle'a” corrected to “Conana Doyle'a”

- P. 5, in: “aaa”:
  “r. 1884” corrected to “r. 1884.” (a period was added at the end of the sentence)

- P. 9, in: he had a narrow nose, sharply protruding from between his eyes
  “wysuwają y” corrected to “wysuwający”

- P. 13, in: originating in a direct line from Hugo Baskerville
  “Baaskerville” corrected to “Baskerville”

- P. 16, in: Suddenly their hair stood on end from fear”:
  “głosy” corrected to “włosy”

- P. 16, in: “and next to her Hugo Baskerville -- dead.”:
  “Baskerwille” corrected to “Baskerville”

- P. 22, in: “Our mutual friend, Mr. Stapleton”:
  “Stupleton” corrected to “Stapleton”

- P. 23, in: “Doctor Mortimer looked at us for a moment with strange eyes”:
  “ocyma” corrected to “oczyma”

- P. 27, in: “Besides, you must admit”:
  “przysznać” corrected to “przyznać”

- P. 27, in: “Hugo’s dog was also not a supernatural phenomenon”:
  “Pie,” corrected to “Pies”

- P. 33, in: “My dear, hand me the violin.”:
  “skrzypce” corrected to “skrzypce.” (a period was added)

- P. 44, in: “-- You will visit each of them in turn.”:
  “po kolei,” corrected to “po kolei.”

- P. 47, in: “Her husband was once mayor of Gloucester”:
  “Glocester” corrected to “Gloucester”

- P. 48, in: “they can execute them before we can prevent it”:
  “zdołomy” corrected to “zdołamy”

- P. 49, in: “-- He guards the palace.”:
  “pałacu” corrected to “pałacu.” (a period was added at the end of the sentence)

- P. 50, in: “Holmes asked.”:
  “pytał Holmes?” corrected to “pytał Holmes.”

- P. 51, in: “These details are very important to me.”:
  “bardze” corrected to “bardzo”

- P. 52, in: “and from under the nightstand he pulled out a yellow boot”:
  “wyobył” corrected to “wydobył”

- P. 52, in: “This is strange, however!”:
  “dziwna” corrected to “dziwne”

- P. 59, in: “Further on is Mr. Frankland of Lafter-Hall”:
  “Lofter-Hall” corrected to “Lafter-Hall”

- P. 62, in: “because such a one will not forgive and will cut a throat”:
  “pederznie” corrected to “poderznie”

- P. 63, in: “The master of this residence, with sparkling eyes”:
  “ocozyma” corrected to “oczyma”

- P. 63, in: “Doctor Mortimer explained to him”:
  “doktór” corrected to “doktor”

- P. 66, in: “besides weeping, I heard nothing at all”:
  “ułyszałem” corrected to “usłyszałem”

- P. 87, in: “introduces a somewhat comical element into it.”:
  “pierwiastku” corrected to “pierwiastku.” (a period was added)

- P. 87, in: “and Mr. Frankland of Lofter-Hall”:
  “Lafter-Hall” corrected to “Lofter-Hall”

- P. 91, in: “The squeak of the key in the lock”:
  “Zdrzyt” corrected to “Zgrzyt”

- P. 93, in: “Miss Beryl asks him for something”:
  “Baryl” corrected to “Beryl”

- P. 95, in: “warning me of the impending danger”:
  “grążącem” corrected to “grożącem”

- P. 96, in: “and I will be grateful to you until death”:
  “bęędę” corrected to “będę”

- P. 97, in: “I sat with Sir Henry in his room until three in the morning”:
  “do do” corrected to “do”

- P. 105, in: “when the sound of the hunt reaches him”:
  “naganki” corrected to “nagonki”

- P. 106, in: “but the living statue no longer stood at their peak.”:
  “szczycie,” corrected to “szczycie.”

- P. 110, in: “for example, Mr. Stapleton’s villa”:
  “Stepleton” corrected to “Stapleton”

- P. 111, in: “who will come to the rescue”:
  “któz” corrected to “któż”

- P. 112, in: “It bore the postmark Coombe-Tracey”:
  “Combe-Tracey” corrected to “Coombe-Tracey”

- P. 119, in: “it would be better for me to set out alone”:
  “wyruszy” corrected to “wyruszył”

- P. 121, in: “Yes, a couple of times, when he came to Coombe-Tracey”:
  “Coombe-Tracy” corrected to “Coombe-Tracey”

- P. 127, in: “I said indifferently”:
  “rzełem” corrected to “rzekłem”

- P. 135, in: “I must commend you for your zeal and cleverness”:
  “Musisz” corrected to “Muszę”

- P. 143, in: “At any rate, returning to London tomorrow”:
  “bąoź” corrected to “bądź”

- P. 154, in: “That telegram from London”:
  “Ow ” corrected to “Ów”

- P. 155, in: “The person who had hitherto passed for his sister”:
  “która,” corrected to “która”

- P. 155, in: “her fingers gripped the armrest of the armchair”:
  “ścikały” corrected to “ściskały”

- P. 165, in: “The room was a kind of museum”:
  “muzem” corrected to “muzeum”

- P. 170, in: “in answer to my question”:
  “prytanie” corrected to “pytanie”

- P. 179, in: “wanting to hurt her”:
  “do tknąć” corrected to “dotknąć”

***
End of Project Gutenberg's *Tajemnica Baskerville'ów*, by Arthur Conan Doyle.
